
# Session #1 What is the Friend of the Bridegroom Ministry?

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. JOHN THE BAPTIST’S VIEW: HIS LIFE, MINISTRY AND PARADIGM OF JESUS

A. John the Baptist was the premier or model forerunner at the first coming of Christ.

A. John the Baptist was the first person in the New Testament to reveal Jesus as the Bridegroom God (Jn. 3:29). John was the first to testified of himself as a “friend of the bridegroom” (Jn. 3:25-36),

>29He who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice. Therefore this joy of mine is fulfilled. (Jn. 3:29)

B. He is the bridegroom: He is a bridegroom in the essence of His personality. He feels, thinks, and acts as a bridegroom because He is a bridegroom forever. He has tender love and burns with desire for His people.

C. He that has the Bride: Jesus has a bride because God promised Him a prepared Bride at the end of natural history. From God’s point of view, Jesus already possessed His Bride.

>7The marriage of the Lamb has come, and His wife has made herself ready. (Rev. 19:7)

D. Friend of the Bridegroom: John functioned as a “friend of the Bridegroom.” This speaks of those who share a specific message—the Bridegroom message, a fasted lifestyle, and an ministry style to not draw the attention of people to themselves but to Jesus. The friend of the Bridegroom role is comparable to the best man or the maid of honor at a wedding whose concern is that the Bride be undistracted by other things but be focused on receiving the embrace of the Bridegroom.

1. Friend of the Bridegroom ministries prepare people to receive Jesus’ embrace as the Bridegroom God. This empowers them to live with the first command in first place.

2. Paul spoke of those who preached or showcased “themselves” (2 Cor 4:5; Phil 2:19-21).

E. Who stands: John was diligent to be attentive to stand in God’s presence in prayer, feeding on the Word. Standing before God is one of primary responsibilities of a prophetic messenger (Jer. 23:18). This is a priestly function as seen in the Levites (Deut. 10:8), Elijah (1 Kgs. 17:1), the two witnesses (Rev. 11:4). Gabriel described himself as one who stands before God (Lk. 1:19).

>18Who has stood in the counsel of the Lord, and has perceived and heard His word? (Jer. 23:18)

F. Who hears him: He was faithful to respond with obedience regardless of the price.

G. Because of the Bridegroom's voice: John grew in understanding of Jesus as the Bridegroom God

H. Rejoices greatly with joy: John was empowered with joy by receiving the revelation of the Bridegroom even in the difficulty of a desert lifestyle

## II. JESUS HIGHLIGHTED THE IMPORTANCE OF JOHN'S MINISTRY

A. Jesus described John as having a burning heart and a shining lamp of ministry that clearly and boldly made known God’s ways and brought light that expelled misunderstanding about Jesus. He brought together the forerunner lifestyle (burning heart) with the forerunner message (lamp).

>35He was the burning [heart] and shining lamp [ministry] and you were willing for a time to rejoice in his light. (Jn 5:35)

B. Jesus spoke of John in Jerusalem (Jn 5:35) in April AD 28 and later spoke to the multitudes in Galilee (Mt. 11:1-19) in the autumn AD 28 describing John as the greatest man in history. No one ever obeyed God more consistently nor prepared for ministry more diligently than John the Baptist.

>11Among those born of women there has not risen one greater than John... (Mt. 11:11)

C. In the end the people of Israel said he was demonized and dangerous to God’s purpose. Jesus assured us that John’s lifestyle and message will be openly vindicated at the Judgment Seat.

>18For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, “He has a demon.” 19…But wisdom is justified [vindicated] by her children [long term fruit]. (Mt. 11:18-19)
