
# Session #11 The Structure of the Book of Revelation

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. THE 4 MAIN PARTS OF THE BOOK OF REVELATION

Part 1—Rev. 1 John’s CALLING to prophesy about the end times. John highlighted 30 truths about Jesus’ majesty that form the way he prophesied about the end times. They also equip us .

Part 2—Rev. 2-3 Jesus gave 7 LETTERS to 7 churches. The instructions Jesus gave to these 7 churches in that day about overcoming sin give us insight into what we must overcome today. Jesus selected churches to identify the main issues that would challenge the end-time Church.

Part 3—Rev. 4-5 Jesus takes the SCROLL containing the earth’s title deed and Jesus’ plan to cleanse it. Jesus takes a 7-sealed scroll from the Father, representing His battle plan to judge, cleanse, and prepare the nations for Jesus’ rule over the earth, while bringing the Church to maturity.

Part 4—Rev. 6-22 Jesus’ BATTLE PLAN reveals His main story line of love in the book of Revelation. It includes the Great Tribulation judgments against the Antichrist who will be at “war” against Jesus (Rev. 11:7; 12:7, 17; 13:4, 7; 17:14; 19:11, 19). His battle plan is seen in 5 chronological sections describing the 21 judgment events (7 seals, 7 trumpets, and 7 bowls) that are released on the Antichrist’s empire in sequential order. Each chronological section is followed by an angelic explanation functioning as a parenthesis, putting the storyline “on pause” to tell John why the judgment events are necessary. They answer “pastoral questions” arising from the chronological sections: Why is God’s wrath so severe? (How can a God of love be so violent?) “What will happen to the Church?” How Jesus will help the saints to stand in the face of great deception and persecution and/or how the Antichrist will attack them.

Rev. 6 Chronological Section #1: The seal judgments against the kingdom of darkness

Rev. 7 Angelic Explanation #1: We receive PROTECTION from judgments and falling away.

Rev. 8-9 Chronological Section #2: The trumpet judgments against the Antichrist

Rev. 10-11 Angelic Explanation #2: We receive DIRECTION by a increase of prophetic ministry.

Rev. 11:15-19 Chronological Section #3: Jesus’ second coming royal procession and the rapture. At the seventh and last trumpet (1 Cor. 15:52; Rev. 10:7; cf. 1 Thes. 4:16): Jesus will replace all evil governmental leaders on earth. It will be a hostile takeover that includes a war.

Rev. 12-14 Angelic Explanation #3: The Antichrist’s CONFRONTATION against the saints and all that God calls good requires that all the Antichrist's governments be replaced.

Rev. 15-16 Chronological Section #4: The bowl judgments destroy evil infrastructures in society.

Rev. 17-18 Angelic Explanation #4: The SEDUCTION by Babylon’s evil religion will permeate and infiltrate all the structures of society, requiring that Babylon be totally destroyed. (Ps. 2:8-9).

Rev. 19-20 Chronological Section #5: Jesus’ triumphal entry to Jerusalem (Rev. 19:11-21:8)

Rev. 21-22 Angelic Explanation #5: The RESTORATION of all things (Acts 3:21; Rev. 21:9-22:5). After Jesus returns, He will restore all that God originally intended in the Garden of Eden.

## II. SUMMARY

A. The 5 chronological sections (seals, trumpets, bowls) tell us what happens to the Antichrist empire.

B. The 5 angelic explanations (parenthetical sections) tell us what happens to God’s people.

C. Summary of the structure of the book of Revelation.

Rev. 1 Pt. 1 John’s CALLING to prophesy about the End-Times

Rev. 2-3 Pt. 2 Jesus gave 7 LETTERS

Rev. 4-5 Pt. 3 Jesus takes the SCROLL

Rev. 6-22 Pt. 4 Jesus’ BATTLE PLAN

Rev. 6 Chronological section #1: SEAL JUDGMENTS
Rev. 7 Angelic Explanation #1: PROTECTION from judgments and falling away

Rev. 8-9 Chronological section #2: TRUMPET JUDGMENTS against Antichrist
Rev. 10-11 Angelic Explanation #2: DIRECTION by increased prophetic ministry

Rev. 11:15-19 Chronological section #3: SECOND COMING PROCESSION
Rev. 12-14 Angelic Explanation #3: violent CONFRONTATION by the Antichrist

Rev. 15-16 Chron. section #4: BOWL JUDGMENTS destroy infrastructures
Rev. 17-18 Angelic Explanation #4: SEDUCTION of Babylon’s evil religion

Rev. 19-20 Chron. section #5: TRIUMPHAL ENTRY (Rev. 19:11-21:8)
Rev. 21-22 Angelic Explanation #5: RESTORATION of all things (Rev. 21:9-22:5)
