
# Session #14The Blessing of Persecution & the Spirit of Glory

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. HOW PERSECUTION BENEFITS A BELIEVER

A. Persecution is both a demonic attack to hinder our spiritual growth and a divine gift to enhance it. God granted and appointed that His people endure persecution (Phil. 1:29) that they may be transformed by it for their benefit in this age (1 Pet. 4:1, 14) and in the age to come (2 Cor. 4:17).

>29For to you it has been granted on behalf of Christ…to suffer for His sake… (Phil. 1:29)

>17Our light affliction…is working for us a far more exceeding…weight of glory… (2 Cor. 4:17)

B. The Lord uses persecution to transform His people and to cause them to cease from sin (1 Pet.4:1). Persecution does not leave room for sin that is so easily tolerated in the Western Church at this time. Peter assured believers that the spirit of glory will rest on those who are persecuted (1 Pet. 4:14).

>1…for he who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin, 2that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh for the lusts of men...
14If you are reproached for the name of Christ, blessed are you, for the Spirit of glory…rests on you…[and] He is glorified. (1 Pet. 4:1-2, 14)

C. Tribulation (persecution) produces perseverance and godly character (Rom. 5:3-4). Persecuted believers grow in dependence on Jesus with more prayer with fasting in seeking discernment—on who and where to meet, etc. The “oil of intimacy” is cultivated best in the fires of persecution.

>3We glory [rejoice] in tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces perseverance [deep resolve to pursue and obey God] 4and perseverance, character [godliness]… (Rom. 5:3-4)

D. The afflictions of Christ are not lacking in terms of accomplishing redemption. Paul rejoiced in the opportunity to magnify how attractive Jesus is to an unbelieving world by loving and trusting His leadership while being persecuted. Believers who faithfully love Jesus even when persecuted are a “living portrait,” giving a public display of how glorious Jesus is to them (Song 5:8, 16).

>24I rejoice in my sufferings…and fill up in my flesh what is lacking in the afflictions of Christ… (Col. 1:24)

>10That I may know Him and [His] power…and the fellowship of His sufferings… (Phil. 3:10)

E. The apostles understood the benefits of persecution and so rejoiced in suffering for Jesus.

>41They departed…rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer…for His name. (Acts 5:41)

F. Peter declared that the genuineness and maturing of a believer’s faith through responding to persecution in a biblical way is more precious than gold.

>6…by various trials, 7that the genuineness [maturity] of your faith, being much more precious than gold…may be found to praise, honor, and glory at the revelation of Jesus… (1 Pet. 1:6-7)

>12…do not think it strange [to be persecuted]… 13rejoice to the extent that you partake of Christ’s sufferings, that when His glory is revealed, you may be glad with exceeding joy. (1 Pet. 4:12-13)
