
# Session #15 Persecution That Proves God’s Good Leadership

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. PERSECUTION BENEFITS A BELIEVER

A. Persecution is both a demonic attack to hinder our spiritual growth and a divine gift to enhance it.

B. God granted and appointed that His people endure persecution (Phil. 1:29) that they may be transformed by it for their benefit in this age (1 Pet. 4:1, 14) and in the age to come (2 Cor. 4:17).

>29For to you it has been granted on behalf of Christ…to suffer for His sake… (Phil. 1:29)

>17Our light affliction…is working for us a far more exceeding…weight of glory… (2 Cor. 4:17)

>1…for he who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin, 2that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh for the lusts of men... 14If you are reproached for the name of Christ, blessed are you, for the Spirit of glory…rests on you…[and] He is glorified. (1 Pet. 4:1-2, 14)

## II. PERSECUTION AS PROOF OF GOD’S GOOD LEADERSHIP: 4 EVIDENCES

A. Paul spoke of persecution as evidence or proof of God’s righteous judgment or wise leadership (2 Thes. 1:3-11). Paul identified 4 ways that give evidence that persecution benefits God’s people.

>3…your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of every one of you all abounds…4so that…[we boast of]…your patience [perseverance] and faith in all your persecutions…that you endure, 5which is manifest evidence [proof] of the righteous judgment of God [good leadership], that you may be counted worthy of [prepared to experience more of] the kingdom…6since it is a righteous thing with God to repay with tribulation those who trouble you, 7and to give you rest… when the Lord Jesus is revealed… (2 Thes. 1:3-7)

B. Evidence #1: The fact that they had patience or perseverance when persecuted is proof that God’s good leadership provided them with grace or supernatural ability to endure with faith and love.

C. Evidence #2: Persecution rightly responded to results in being “counted worthy” or equipped to experience more kingdom activity. “Worthy” doesn’t mean “deserving of,” but “suited for,” or “prepared for.” Persecution purifies us by leading us to align more with God’s leadership. Persecution is an effective “accelerant” to maturing in godliness which in turn increases our spiritual capacity to enjoy God and experience more kingdom activity in our lives.

>35Some of those of understanding shall fall [martyred], to refine and purify them… (Dan. 11:35)

D. Evidence #3: God’s wisdom in repaying with tribulation those who persecute His people becomes evident as their evil deeds and love of darkness are manifest (Jn. 3:19). Their murderous desires come to the surface as they persecute people —a dark dynamic occurs in them as they become “drunk with blood” (Rev. 17:6). The greatest criticism of God in history is that His judgments are not fair. God’s judgment of the wicked is vindicated as their love of darkness comes to the surface.

>19[The verdict is]…men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. (Jn. 3:19)

E. Evidence #4: God gives them ultimate rest when they receive “all the good pleasure of His goodness” (2 Thes. 1:11) in the age to come related to their spiritual maturity resulting from persecution. Thus it helps us grow unto being worthy (prepared) to receive the fullness of our calling.

>6…it is a righteous thing with God…7to give you rest…when the Lord Jesus is revealed… 11We pray always for you that God would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of His goodness…12that…Christ be glorified in you, and you in Him… (2 Thes. 1:6-12)
