
# Session #19 Why the Error of Replacement Theology is Spiritually Dangerous

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. REVIEW

A. Believers must not remain ignorant of the biblical narrative of Israel because it is the beginning of a 5-stage progression of darkness and can progressively lead believers into hardness of heart.

B. A 5-stage progression: Ignorance (stage #1—v. 25) can lead to boasting (stage #2— v. 18 with its passive resistance that refuses to stand for Israel), which leads to arrogance (stage #3—v. 20) which can lead to active resistance (stage #4—persecuting Israel), which may lead to being cut off by God (stage #5—v. 22e). In the fear of God (v. 20), we deeply consider God’s goodness (v. 22a) which includes gratitude to God for allowing us to be grafted in to “the olive tree of Abraham” (v. 17).

>17[Gentiles] were grafted into...the olive tree [Israel], 18do not boast against the branches [Israel]... 20Do not be haughty, but fear. 21For if God did not spare the natural branches [Israel], He may not spare you either. 22Consider the goodness and severity of God: on those who fell, severity; but toward you [Gentiles], goodness, if you continue in His goodness. Otherwise you will be cut off… 25I do not desire…that you [Gentiles] should be ignorant of this mystery… (Rom. 11:17-25)

## II. WHY REPLACEMENT THEOLOGY IS SPIRITUALLY DANGEROUS

A. We must take a stand against replacement theology because bad theology leads to bad practice!

B. Replacement theology has provided the rationale for much persecution against the Jewish people throughout Christian history. God has sovereignly ordained that Gentile believers provoke Israel to jealousy in the generation the Lord returns, resulting in all Israel being saved (Rom. 11:11, 25-26).

C. John described Satan’s desire to exterminate the Jewish people, using a prophetic picture of Israel as a woman being attacked by Satan as a dragon (Rev. 12:1-17). Satan has had a special focus, hatred, and rage throughout all history in seeking to destroy the Jewish people.

>13The dragon [Satan]…persecuted the woman [remnant of Israel]…15The serpent spewed water out of his mouth like a flood after the woman,.. 17The dragon was enraged with the woman, and he went to make war with the rest of her offspring, who…have the testimony of Jesus Christ. (Rev. 12:13-17)

D. The multitudes in the nations will all have to make a decision “for” or “against” Jesus’ leadership over Jerusalem in the end-time conflicts (Joel 3:14). I believe this will be a litmus test of obedience to Jesus’ leadership. We love Him; thus, we want to love who and what He loves (Zech. 8:2).

>1“…when I bring back the captives of Judah and Jerusalem, 2I will gather all nations…to the Valley of Jehoshaphat [Jerusalem]; I will enter into judgment with them there on account of My people…whom they have scattered among the nations; they have also divided up My land. 3They have cast lots for My people, have given a boy as payment for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine… 12Let the nations…come to the Valley of Jehoshaphat…I will judge all the surrounding nations… 14Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision! For the day of the LORD is near…” (Joel 3:1-14)

E. The battle for Jerusalem is a spiritual, political, and military battle for the control of Jerusalem.

>1The day of the LORD is coming…2I will gather all…nations to battle against Jerusalem… 3Then the Lord will go forth [the return of Jesus] and fight against those nations. (Zech. 14:1-3)

F. Gentile believers are called to provoke Israel with jealousy to know the God of Israel (Rom. 11:11). Many in Israel will desire to have a relationship with the God of Israel like the Gentiles enjoy. This will happen as Gentiles show them love in the face of unprecedented global anti-Semitism.

>11…to provoke them [Israel] to jealousy, salvation has come to the Gentiles. (Rom. 11:11)

1. I am grateful that those with a dispensationalists pre-tribulation rapture theology do not embrace replacement theology. They do teach that a great revival will come to Israel during the Great Tribulation—but this will only occur “after” the Church is raptured. Thus, some do not engage with God’s purposes for Israel in a deep way in this hour because they do not see a large number of Jewish people getting saved until the Great Tribulation, and some do not see themselves as having an integral role with other Gentiles in provoking Israel (Rom. 11:11).

2. The IHOPKC leadership embraces historic premillennialism with a victorious Church. We believe that the Church will go through the Great Tribulation yet in great power and victory. At that time the fullness of the Gentiles will come resulting Israel being provoked to jealousy.

G. The Church must take a stand to boldly declare God’s purposes for Israel so all the nations hear it

>11The LORD has proclaimed [mandated] to the end of the world [Gentiles in the nations]: “Say to the daughter of Zion, ‘Surely your salvation is coming…’” (Isa. 62:11)

>10“Hear the word of the LORD, O nations, and declare it in the isles afar off and say, ‘He who scattered Israel will gather him and keep him as a shepherd…” (Jer. 31:10)

H. The main theme of these chapters in this list are related to Israel (Deut. 28-33; Isa. 60-66; Jer. 30-33; Ezek. 34-48; Joel 2-3; Zech. 8-14; cf. Ps. 2; 44; 45; 65-68; 72; 79; 80; 83; 85-87; 94; 102; 118; 122; 132; 144-147).

I. Specific passages that give insight into God’s heart and plans for Israel (Gen. 12:1-3, 7; 13:14-18; 15:7, 18; 17:1-8, 19; 22:15-18; 26:2-5; 27:29; 28:10-15; 32:24-32; Num. 23:7-10, 18-26; 24:1-19; Deut. 4:27-31; 30:1-10; 33:26-29; Isa. 2:1-4; 4:2-6; 6:9-13; 9:1-7; 11:11-16; 12:1-6; 24:14-16; 19:18-25; 26:1-13; 27:1-6; 28:14-29; 29:17-19; 30:18-30; 32:13-19; 33:2-17; 35:1-10; 40:9-11; 43:1-7; 44:1-8; 45:17-25; 51:3-11; 52:6-10; 54:1-17; 59:19-21; Jer. 3:14-19; Ezek. 11:17-20; 16:60-63; 20:33-44; Dan. 9:4-27; Hos. 2:14-23; 5:15-16; 6:1-3; 14:1-8; Amos 9:11-15; Mic. 4:1-13; 5:2-15; 7:14-20; Hab. 3:1-20; Zeph. 3:8-20; Hag. 2:6-22; Zech. 1:12-17; 2:1-13; Mal. 3:1-6; 4:1-6).

J. See https://mikebickle.org/resource/21-prayers-for-israel-and-the-isaiah-62-fast
