
# Session #2 Why the Forerunner Message is Essential Today

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. ISAIAH PROPHESIED OF END-TIME MESSENGERS (ISA. 40:3-5)

A. Isaiah prophesied of end-time messengers who would prepare the way for Jesus’ return to Jerusalem (Isa. 40:3-5). At the time of Jesus’ return, “all flesh” or the whole earth will see God's glory together (40:5). John the Baptist was a forerunner messenger who prepared the way for Jesus’ first coming.

>3The voice of one crying in the wilderness: "Prepare the way of the LORD; make straight in the desert a highway for our God…4the crooked places shall be made straight… 5The glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh [all nations] shall see it together [at of Jesus’ coming]. (Isa. 40:3-5)

B. John the Baptist was a “down payment” of this prophecy. He was only a partial fulfillment of it. John’s ministry gives us insight into the forerunner ministry at the end of the age. He is the clearest model in Scripture of the end-time forerunner ministry as was prophesied in Isaiah 40:3-5. Undoubtedly, John knew from his youth he was a forerunner to be prepared in the wilderness as declared in the Scripture. He prepared for about 20 years for only 2 years of public ministry.

>22Who are you…? What do you say about yourself? 23He said: “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: make straight the way of the Lord, as the prophet Isaiah said.” (Jn. 1:22-23)

>23I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness…as the prophet Isaiah said. (Jn. 1:23)

C. Prepare the way: Bring people into agreement in understanding with what is coming. They must understand it, so that they have a chance to agree with it instead of turn it away. It is a great mercy that God raises up forerunner messengers that prepare the way. It takes time for people to digest truth that leads to embracing new paradigms and values. Most do not suddenly change.

1. Forerunner ministries prepare the way for the Lord by preparing people to respond rightly to
Jesus in the end times as they grow in understanding His heart and plans.

2. A end-time messenger with a forerunner spirit is someone who prepares people to respond in
a right way to the events related to Jesus’ second coming.

D. The reason the forerunner message is essential is because the Lord requires voluntary partnership. He will not force the body of Christ to intimate partnership with Him

E. The Spirit will raise up forerunner ministries with grace to prepare people for Jesus’ return.

F. The Spirit will emphasize various aspects of God's end-time plan to His many messengers one a short step before He emphasizes them to entire global body of Christ. End-time messengers with a forerunner spirit prepare God’s people for the unique dynamics of the generation the Lord returns.

## II. CHARACTERISTICS OF MESSENGERS WITH A FORERUNNER SPIRIT

A. The forerunner message builds a spiritual highway for God.

>3The voice of one crying in the wilderness: “Prepare the way of the LORD; make straight in the desert a highway for our God. 4Every valley shall be exalted and every mountain and hill brought low; the crooked places shall be made straight and the rough places smooth.” (Isa. 40:3-4)

B. Highway: Isaiah spoke of a spiritual highway. It is a “highway” that God can travel on or one in which He releases His glory (cargo). God determined to move on earth through His people who agree with Him. Thus. The highway God moves on is the voluntary agreement of His people with Him.

1. His messengers announce what the Spirit is about to openly release in the nations so that they can prepare people to respond rightly to Jesus by making known His heart and His plans.

2. In the ancient world, when a king announced that he was coming to visit a city, they built new roads or highways to accommodate his visit.

C. The voice of one crying: John the Baptist was a voice and not an echo. There was an authentic ring of truth when John spoke the message because what he was making known to the people came from the reality of how he lived in his secret life in God. There is urgency or crying out in the wilderness.

D. One crying in the wilderness: John was prepared in the wilderness of fasting and prayer.

E. Make is straight: John was to make clear without any compromise about what God wass saying and doing. Make the truth abundantly clear. Remove the ambiguity. Lay it out there as clear as God will give it to you. Making truth “straight” is often politically incorrect and it makes people angry.

F. The forerunner message addresses spiritual valleys, mountains and crooked and rough places.

>3…“Prepare the way of the LORD; Make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
4Every valley shall be exalted and every mountain and hill brought low; the crooked places shall
be made straight and the rough places smooth.” (Isa. 40:3-4)

1. Valleys: The valleys are exalted. The valleys include the emotional low spots related to the spirit of rejection, accusation. Those low spots in our lives, the depressed areas. He wants the valleys to be brought up, or stabilized by the knowledge of God.

2. Mountains: These are the areas of our pride that God wants to bring down. Men’s own agendas, their desire to be a name and a face, their own agendas, bring the mountains down.

3. The crooked places: the addictions and perversions in many ways—sexual, money, bitterness,

4. The rough places: Rough places include those who live and lead with a judgmental accusing spirit, or with the cruel speech and harsh spirit of the Pharisees, that lacked tenderness.

G. Forerunners are “messengers” who function with a specific message in different spheres of life. For example, they are preachers, evangelists, artists (singers, musicians, actors, etc.), writers (internet), media, marketplace or intercessors as well as those who disciple people one-on-one in the church, marketplace, campus, or home (moms are some of the most important forerunners).
