
# Session #22 The Forerunner Message Made Simple (Part 1)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. SUMMARY OF THE FORERUNNER MESSAGE:

A. Summary of the message: The beauty of Jesus as Bridegroom, King, and Judge returning to Jerusalem to rule all the nations and to fill the entire earth with the glory of God. This includes His plans to equip a global prayer movement leading to the release of unprecedented power resulting in the “billion soul harvest,” the salvation of Israel (Rom. 11:26), and the transformation of the Church to be a unified family (Jn. 17:23), and a prepared Bride (Rev. 19:7).

>13looking for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ. (Titus 2:13)

>20The LORD said…21all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the LORD. (Num. 14:20-21)

>3…“Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them…” (Rev. 21:3)

B. The Scripture speaks of birth pains related to the end times (Mt. 24:8 [ESV, NIV]; Mk. 13:8; 1 Thes. 5:3; cf. Isa. 13:8; 26:17; 42:14; 66:8; Jer. 6:23; 30:6; Hos. 13:13; Mic. 4:9-10; 5:3). The earth and its people will go through a “birth canal,” resulting in the millennial new world order. Thus, the “baby that is born” is Jesus ruling all nations and establishing the true “new world order.”

>7For nation will rise against nation…and there will be famines, pestilences, and earthquakes… 8All these are the beginning of sorrows [birth pains; ESV, NIV].” (Mt. 24:7-8)

>8“…Shall the earth be made to give birth in one day?...For as soon as Zion was in labor, she gave birth to her children. 9Shall I bring to the time of birth, and not cause delivery?” (Isa. 66:8-9)

C. We are spiritually prepared as we gain “living understanding” of Jesus and His excellent leadership. This is the key “metrics” for our preparation. The Lord will raise up “people of understanding” who will help others to understand the biblical end-time narrative (Dan. 11:33; 12:10; Jer. 23:20; 30:24).

>33Those of the people who understand [end-time messengers] shall instruct many… (Dan. 11:33)

>20…the LORD [in judgment] will not turn back…in the latter days you will understand it perfectly. (Jer. 23:20)

## II. WHY UNDERSTANDING THE BIBLICAL VIEW OF THE END TIMES IS IMPORTANT

A. Reason #1—unique dynamics: The generation of Jesus’ return will have unique dynamics—unprecedented pressures (shaking, sin, darkness) and an unprecedented outpouring of the Spirit. This will create a situation in which the nations will be afraid and confused searching for answers.

>2For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth...and His glory will be seen upon you. (Isa. 60:2)

B. Reason #2—biblical reasons: By far the most described generation in Scripture is the generation that will be alive when Jesus returns. It is the main focus in over 150 chapters in the Bible (see mikebickle.org/resources/resource/2888 for a list of these chapters).

C. Reason #3—prophetic reasons: The biblical signs of the times include events and trends that are predicted in Scripture. Jesus, the apostles, and the OT prophets prophesied signs of the times—these signs will alert God’s people (who are alive in the generation of Jesus’ return) of His soon return.

D. Reason #4—Pastoral reasons: People must understand the biblical narrative for what will happen and why it will happen, or they will be left, by default, to embrace a secular narrative of the events, making them more vulnerable to be overcome by fear, offense, lust, and deception. However, by understanding the biblical narrative, God’s people will be better equipped to process the escalating pressures in a way that helps them to thrive spiritually and grow in love and peace.

1. Jesus highlighted four issues that will challenge many people’s faith in the end times: Fear (Lk. 21:26), Offense (Mt. 24:10), Lust (Lk. 21:34), and Deception (Mt. 24:11)—F-O-L-D.

2. The end-time falling away is the most tragic reality in history (2 Thes. 2:3; 1 Tim. 4:1-2)

E. The metaphor of “birthing a child” is emphasized often as a paradigm to interpret the end times. When we have kingdom understanding, then “like a mother in labor”—the pain is well worth it. Imagine billions of years in God’s glory on a resurrected planet after only 3½ years of heavy labor.

>21A woman, when she is in labor, has sorrow because her hour has come; but as soon as she has given birth to the child, she no longer remembers the anguish, for joy that human being has been born 22I will see you again…and your joy no one will take from you. (Jn. 16:21-22)

## III. THE REVELATION OF JESUS: BRIDEGROOM, KING, AND JUDGE

A. The Word and the Spirit emphasize Jesus as Bridegroom, King, and Judge at the end of the age. Jesus is a King with great power, a Bridegroom with deep desire for relationship with His people, and a Judge with righteous zeal to remove everything that hinders love—there is no contradiction!

B. Some ministries either refuse or emphasize just one of these 3 truths over the other two.

1. To understand Jesus as the Bridegroom without seeing Him as the King and Judge may lead to sentimentality without obedience and misunderstanding of His end-time plans.

2. To understand Jesus as the King without seeing Him as the Bridegroom and Judge may lead to an authoritarian view of God or to a misunderstanding of why God releases power through His people. This leads some to be overly focused on growing in power for “their ministry.”

3. To understand Jesus as the Judge without seeing Him as the Bridegroom King may lead to a harsh view of God or a wrong understanding about judgment resulting in anger or offense.

>54[John]…“Lord, do You want us to command fire to…consume them, just as Elijah did?” 55He…rebuked them…“You do not know what manner of spirit you are of. (Lk. 9:54-55)

C. In Jesus’ final message to the apostles before the last supper in the upper room (Jn. 14-17), He revealed Himself as Bridegroom (Mt. 25:1-13), King (Mt. 25:31), and Judge (Mt. 25:32-46).

>1Then the kingdom…shall be likened to ten virgins who…went to meet the Bridegroom… 31When the Son of Man comes…He will sit on the throne of His glory. 32All the nations
will be gathered before Him, and He will separate them [as the Judge]… (Mt. 25:1, 31-32)
