
# Session #23 The Forerunner Message Made Simple (Part 2)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. THE LORD’S “JUSTICE MASTERPLAN” FOR HUMAN HISTORY

A. Summary of the message: The beauty of Jesus as Bridegroom, King, and Judge returning to Jerusalem to rule all the nations and to fill the entire earth with the glory of God. This includes His plans to equip a global prayer movement leading to the release of unprecedented power resulting in the “billion soul harvest,” the salvation of Israel (Rom. 11:26), and the transformation of the Church to be a unified family (Jn. 17:23), and a prepared Bride (Rev. 19:7).

B. Isaiah prophesied that the Messiah would establish justice in all the nations (Isa. 42:1, 4). The full release of justice in the end times involves many positive and seemingly “negative” activities.

>1I have put My Spirit upon Him [Jesus]; He will bring forth justice to the Gentiles [worldwide]… 4He will not fail nor be discouraged, till He has established justice in the earth… (Isa. 42:1, 4)

C. Optimum environment: God is establishing the optimum environment for His people to walk in love and purity. God uses the least severe means to bring the greatest number of people to the deepest level of love. What the devil means for evil, God will use for good to train His people. ‘

D. Satan will raise up a counterfeit justice movement. I recommend S. Greaves’ book False Justice.

## II. THE POSITIVE TRENDS, PEOPLE, AND EVENTS—ABOUT 15 CATEGORIES

A. The Lord’s end-time “Justice Masterplan” includes an unprecedented outpouring of the Spirit and a loving yet divine discipline of Israel and the Church resulting in Israel’s national salvation and in a purified Church, a harvest of souls, and all the earth filled with God’s glory, and more.

B. #1 Return of Jesus: Jesus’ royal procession will be seen by every person (Rev. 1:7; Rev. 21:3).

C. #2 Rapture: The rapture will occur when Jesus returns to “catch up” all believers in the air.

>29Immediately after the tribulation of those days…30All the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds…31He will send His angels…they will gather together His elect [the rapture]…from one end of heaven to the other. (Mt. 24:29-31)

D. #3 Millennial Kingdom: Jesus will return to rule over all nations for 1,000 years (Rev. 20:4-6). At this time, Satan will be cast into prison (Rev. 20:1-3) and God’s kingdom with righteousness will be openly manifested worldwide, affecting every sphere of life (education, politics, agriculture, economics, social institutions, etc.). Jesus will restore the agriculture, animal life, and atmosphere to the conditions seen in Eden (Isa. 11:1-16; 51:1-8; 60-62; 65:17-25).

E. #4 New Jerusalem: The heavenly city will descend to the earth on two occasions—at the beginning (Rev. 21:10) and at the end (Rev. 21:2) of the Millennium. The resurrected saints will live there.

F. #5 Two witnesses: The two men who will prophesy with great power for 3½ years (Rev. 11:3-6).

G. #6 144,000: The Lord will anoint 144,000 Jewish believers (Rev. 7:4-8; 14:1-5) who will be supernaturally sealed or protected by the power of God so that they cannot be harmed.

H. #7 Great revival: The greatest revival and unprecedented outpouring of the Spirit in history will occur in the end times. It will include miracles that were seen in the book of Acts and the book of Exodus yet combined and multiplied on a global scale (Mic. 7:15; Acts. 2:19; Rev. 11:3-6).

I. #8 Great harvest: I believe over 1 billion new souls will be saved (Mt. 24:14; Rev. 7:9; 14:6).

J. #9 Bridal paradigm: A bridal perspective of the kingdom will equip the Church with confidence and courageous love as they encounter Jesus as their Bridegroom King (Rev. 22:17).

K. #10 Prayer and worship: There be a global end-time prayer and worship movement that will operate in great authority (Lk. 18:7-8; Rev. 8:3-5; 22:17; cf. Isa. 25:9; 30:18-19; 42:10-13; 62:6-7).

L. #11 Spirit of prophecy: All believers will operate in the Spirit—dreams, visions, etc. (Acts 2:17).

M. #12 Supernatural protection: There will be occasions where the Lord will supernaturally protect His people in the end-time shakings. His judgments did not touch Goshen, where His people lived. The “Goshen Principle” will be operative in some places (Ex. 8:22-23; 9:4-6, 26; 10:23; 11:7).

N. #13 Supernatural provision: There will be occasions when the Lord will supernaturally provide food and water like He did when His people left Egypt and journeyed through the wilderness.

O. #14 Rebuilding the temple—it is referred to as the temple of God (2 Thes. 2:4; Rev. 11:1).

P. #15 Salvation of Israel: Israel is the first nation in which every person will be saved (Rom. 11:26). Israel will be provoked to spiritual jealousy to experience have what Gentile believers possess in their relationship with the God of Israel (Rom. 11:11). This only occurs as the Church walks in the fullness of the Gentiles and as they love and stand for God’s purposes for Israel (Jer. 31:7-10).

>11Through their [Israel’s] fall, to provoke them to jealousy, salvation [leadership] has come to the Gentiles…25blindness in part has happened to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in. 26So all Israel will be saved… (Rom. 11:11, 25-26)

## III. THE NEGATIVE TRENDS, PEOPLE, AND EVENTS—ABOUT 15 CATEGORIES

A. Jesus’ “Justice Masterplan” includes raising up the Antichrist with unprecedented power, and allowing demonic activity and man’s sin to come to fullness (Dan. 8:23; Rev. 9:21). This will result in a great persecution of the Church and Israel, all nations gathering against Jerusalem, a great falling away from the faith, and unprecedented judgments on the nations (Antichrist’s empire).

B. #1 The Great Tribulation will be the most difficult, powerful, and important 3½ years in history.

>21There will be great tribulation, such as has not been since the beginning of the world...nor ever shall be. 22Unless those days were shortened, no flesh would be saved [physically]; (Mt. 24:21-22)

C. #2 The Antichrist (Rev. 13:1-10) will wage war against Jesus and His people as the most powerful leader in history. In light of his 10-nation confederation, he will have the largest army and religious network using demonic miracles to deceive and political processes to kill resistors (Rev. 13:12-18).

D. #3 The 10-nation confederation will be a political, military, and economic alliance of 10 nations that provides the Antichrist with the greatest power base of any man in history (Rev. 17:12-17).

E. #4 The False Prophet (Rev. 13:11-18) is the leader of the worldwide religious network that will be devoted to causing all the people on earth to worship Satan and the Antichrist (Rev. 13:4, 8).

F. #5 The healing of the Antichrist’s head wound will be the great catalytic event that thrusts the Antichrist into worldwide prominence (Rev. 13:3, 12, 14). He will seemingly be killed and healed before all, causing them to be overwhelmed with awe so as to worship him (Rev. 13:3-4).

G. #6 The abomination of desolation occurs when the Antichrist declares himself to be God by setting up his image in the Jerusalem temple (Dan. 11:31; 12:11; Mt. 24:15; 2 Thes. 2:3-4; Rev. 13:12-18). Two elements of the abomination are the image and mark of the Beast (Rev. 13:15-18).

H. #7 The harlot Babylon: A worldwide religious and economic network will be operating at this time. God’s will judge Babylon’s religious network (Rev. 17) and her economic network (Rev. 18).

I. #8 The 3-numbered-judgment series: The Great Tribulation includes an unprecedented judgment referred to as the 3-numbered-judgment series–7 seals, 7 trumpets, and 7 bowls (Rev. 6-16). These 3-numbered-judgment-series will destroy Harlot Babylon and the Antichrist’s empire.

J. #9 Counterfeit peace and safety: There will be a short season of peace and safety that will end suddenly when the destruction associated with the Great Tribulation begins (1 Thes. 5:3). This counterfeit time of peace will continue for the first 3½ years of the final 7 years of this age.

K. #10 Martyrdom: There will be an unprecedented number of Christian who become martyrs (Dan. 7:21, 25; 8:24; 11:33-35; 12:7, 10; Rev. 6:9-11; 9:21; 11:7; 13:7, 15; 16:5-7; 17:6; 18:24; 19:2).

L. #11 Falling away: The end-time falling away will be the most tragic reality in all of human history (2 Thes. 2:3; cf. 1 Tim. 4:1-2; 2 Tim. 3:1-7; 4:3-5; 2 Pet. 2:1-3).

M. #12 Armageddon Campaign: Armageddon is not a battle but a location in northern Israel that will function as the military staging area to mobilize the Antichrist’s armies (Rev. 16:14).

N. #13 The battle for Jerusalem: All nations will gather to fight against Jerusalem (Zech. 14:2).

O. #14 Sin expressed in fullness: People embracing sin in the greatest measure (Dan. 8:23; Rev. 9:21).

>21They did not repent of their murders…sorceries …sexual immorality or their thefts. (Rev. 9:21)

P. #15 The spirit of delusion: Released by God on those who do not love the truth (2 Thes. 2:11).

## IV. THERE ARE 3 PROPHETIC TIME FRAMES IN THE END TIMES

A. There are 3 prophetic time frames related to the final 7 years (Dan. 9:27; Mt. 24:8; 1 Thes. 5:2-3)—the beginning of birth pains, the counterfeit peace and safety (3½ years), and the Great Tribulation.

B. The first prophetic time frame: The beginning of birth pains. Jesus, the apostles, and the OT prophets prophesied signs of the times that will alert God’s people that Jesus’ return is imminent. For the first time in history, most of these are increasing and making headline news globally. Jesus identified 12 negative sign trends occurring at this time (Mt. 24:4-8, 14; Mk. 13:5-8; Lk. 21:7-18).

1. Rebuilding of the city of Babylon as a global religious and economic center (Rev. 17-18);

2. The emergence of a 10-nation confederation in alliance with the Antichrist (Rev. 17:12);

3. Rebuilding the temple in Jerusalem and offering animal sacrifices (as Moses taught).

C. The second prophetic time frame: Counterfeit peace and safety. This will end suddenly when the destruction associated with the Great Tribulation begins (1 Thes. 5:3). This peace will continue for the first 3½ years of the final 7 years of this age. During this time watch for the emergence of a worldwide religious network called the Harlot Babylon operating during this time (Rev. 17).

D. The third prophetic time frame: the Great Tribulation that begins in middle of the final 7 years of this age and lasts for 3½ years—it is initiated by the abomination of desolation (Mt. 24:15) and the healing of the Antichrist’s wound (Rev. 13:3). The two witnesses will do miracles (Rev. 11:3-6).

E. Jesus’ coming: His royal procession to earth to be received as King on His throne in Jerusalem; It will be a 3-stage royal procession that includes many events—He will travel across the sky in glory, then on the land through Jordan (Edom), and then into Jerusalem to be crowned King.
