
# Session #26 Seven Situations in Israel During the Tribulation (Pt. 2)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. ISRAEL REFINED: 7 SITUATIONS FOR JEWS IN THE LAND IN THE 3½ YEARS

A. The Lord will bring 1/3 of Israel through the fire to refine them in bringing them to salvation. It is possible that over 5-6 million Jews worldwide will look to Jesus for salvation in the end times.

>9I will bring the one-third through the fire…each will say, “The LORD is my God.” (Zech. 13:9)

>26And so all Israel will be saved, as it is written… (Rom. 11:26)

B. The time of intense difficulty for Israel in the end times will not last longer than 42 months (Dan. 12:1, 7; Mt. 24:21-22; cf. Dan. 7:25; 9:27; 12:7; Rev. 11:2-3; 12:6, 14; 13:5).

C. I identify 7 situations for Jewish people living in Israel during the Tribulation (for 3½ years):

1. Some will remain in the land—protected by God (Isa. 4:3; Zech. 12:6-14; 14:2; Rev. 7:4).

2. Some will be anointed for ministry (Joel 2:28; Mic. 7:15; Rev. 11:3; 16:6; 18:24).

3. Some will be empowered for battle in military conflict (Is. 41:15 Zech. 9:13; 10:3-7; 12:6-8).

4. Some will flee into the wilderness of the nations (Ezek. 20:35; Mt. 24:16; Rev. 12:14).

5. Some will rebel against God (Ezek. 20:38; 34:16-22).

6. Some will be killed by the Antichrist’s forces (Dan. 7:21; 25; Zech. 11:16; 13:8; Rev. 13:7).

7. Some will be taken captive—Half of those in Jerusalem will be taken captive (Zech. 14:2).

>2I will gather all the nations…against Jerusalem…half of the city shall go into captivity,… (Zech. 14:2)

## II. #1 SOME WILL REMAIN IN THE LAND—PROTECTED BY GOD

A. Some who remain in the land and those in the nations will be supernaturally protected (Isa. 4:3; 43:2; Zech. 14:2; Rev. 7:4; 12:14-16; cf. Ezek. 9:4-6; 28:25-26 were partially fulfilled).

>2I will gather all the nations to battle against Jerusalem…half of the city shall go into captivity, but the remnant of the people shall not be cut off from the city. (Zech. 14:2)

>3It shall come to pass that he who is left…and remains in Jerusalem will be called holy. (Isa. 4:3)

## III. #2 SOME WILL BE ANOINTED FOR MINISTRY

A. Some Jewish people will be anointed for prophetic ministry (Isa. 59:20-21; Joel 2:28; Mic. 7:15; Rev. 11:3; 16:6; 18:24). There will be a strong prophetic movement in Jerusalem.

>1“Blow the trumpet in Zion [Jerusalem]…the day of the LORD is coming…15Blow the trumpet in Zion, consecrate a fast…” 18Then the LORD will be zealous for His land… 27“Then you shall know that I am in the midst of Israel… 28I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh; your [Jerusalem] sons and daughters shall prophesy… 32In Jerusalem there shall be deliverance… (Joel 2:1-32)

## IV. #3 SOME WILL BE EMPOWERED FOR BATTLE IN MILITARY CONFLICT

A. Some will be empowered for battle in military conflict especially at the end of the Tribulation (Isa. 11:14; 41:15; Obad. 18; Mic. 4:13; 5:8-9; Zech. 9:13, 15; 10:3-7; 12:6-8; 14:14).

B. The Lord will make Israel into a mighty threshing sledge that will thresh mountains, speaking of destroying the Antichrist armies (Isa. 41:15). The “you” that God will make into a “threshing sledge” speaks of empowering the Israeli military to resist the Antichrist before Jesus returns. This occurs at the time of Israel’s national salvation—when they all rejoice in the Lord (Isa. 41:16).

## V. #4 SOME WILL FLEE INTO THE WILDERNESS OF THE NATIONS

A. Some Jewish people will flee as refugees from Israel into the “wilderness of the nations” (Ezek. 20:35; Hos. 2:14; Mt. 24:16; Rev. 12:14).

>15“…when you see the ‘abomination of desolation’…standing in the holy place [Jerusalem]… 16“then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains…[in the Middle East].” (Mt. 24:15-16)

B. God has ordained places of provision for Israel as she flees into the wilderness of the nations.

>35I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples [nations, NIV], and there I will plead My case with you face to face. 36Just as I pleaded My case with your fathers in the wilderness of…Egypt, I will plead My case with you…37I will bring you into the bond of the covenant… (Ezek. 20:35-37)

C. The “wings of an eagle” spoke of Israel being brought to God at Mt. Sinai (Ex. 19:4).

>13Now when the dragon [Satan]…persecuted the woman [the remnant of Israel]…
14The woman was given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, where she is nourished for [3½ years]…
16The earth helped the woman… (Rev. 12:13-16)

>14“…I will allure her, will bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfort to her…15 She shall sing there… 16It shall be, in that day…that you will call Me ‘My Husband’…” (Hos. 2:14-16)

>12…in that day the LORD will thresh [to gather Israel as grain]…you will be gathered one by one, O you children of Israel … 13in that day, the great trumpet will be blown [at Jesus’ return]; they [Jewish refugees] will come, who are about to perish in the land of Assyria, and they who are outcasts [refugees] in Egypt, and shall worship the LORD [Jesus] in…Jerusalem. (Isa. 27:12-13)

## VI. #5 SOME WILL REBEL AGAINST GOD

A. Some Jewish people will rebel against the Lord (Ezek. 20:38; 34:16-22).

>35“I will bring you into the wilderness of [the nations]…I will plead My case with you face to face… 38I will purge the rebels from among you…they shall not enter the land of Israel.” (Ezek. 20:35-38)

>16“…I will destroy the fat and the strong [wicked leaders], and feed them in judgment”… 17“I shall judge between sheep and sheep, between rams and goats…20Behold, I Myself will judge between the fat and the lean sheep. 21Because you have pushed with side and shoulder, butted all the weak ones with your horns, and scattered them abroad…” (Ezek. 34:16-21)

## VII. #6 SOME WILL BE KILLED BY THE ANTICHRIST’S FORCES

A. Some Jewish people will killed by the Antichrist’s forces (Zech. 13:8; cf. Isa. 3:24-26; Dan. 7:21, 25; Zech. 11:16). The Hebrew word ha'arets or eretz can mean “the earth” or “the land.” The context determines which is best. The phrase “haa’ erets” (all the land) occurs 3 times in Zechariah (4:10; 5:6; 13:8), and translated as earth in 4:10 and 5:6. The timing of the 2/3 dying is the same as when the 1/3 are saved. Up to 50% of the Gentiles will die in the Tribulation (Rev. 6:8; 9:15).

>8“And it shall come to pass in all the land [earth],” Says the LORD, “That two-thirds in it shall be cut off and die, but one-third shall be left in it: 9I will bring the one-third through the fire…they will call on My name…and each one will say, ‘The LORD is my God.’” (Zech. 13:8-9)

B. Some will be killed by the Antichrist’s forces (Dan. 7:21, 25; Zech. 11:16; 13:8).

>21“I was watching; and the same horn [the Antichrist] was making war against the saints, and prevailing against them, 22until the Ancient of Days [the Father] came, and a judgment was made in favor of the saints…25He [the Antichrist] shall …persecute the saints…Then the saints shall be given into his hand [to oppress and kill them] for a time and times and half a time [3½ years]. (Dan. 7:21-25)

## VIII. #7 SOME WILL BE TAKEN CAPTIVE

A. Some Jewish people will be taken captive—Zechariah prophesied that half of the Jewish people in Jerusalem will be taken captive (Zech. 14:2). Current, nearly 600,000 Jews live in Jerusalem.

>2I will gather all the nations to battle against Jerusalem; the city shall be taken…half of the city shall go into captivity, but the remnant of the people shall not be cut off from the city. 3Then the LORD will go forth and fight against those nations… (Zech. 14:2-3)

1. The Old Testament addresses Jewish people being scattered, persecuted, and/or taken captive at various times in history, yet particularly in context to the generation of Jesus’ return (Ps. 102:20; Isa. 11:11-14, 16; 14:1-3; 19:23; 27:12-13; 40:11; 42:7, 16, 22; 45:14; 49:9-12, 21, 24-26; 60:10, 12, 14; 61:1, 5; Jer. 30:3, 8, 10, 17; 31:16, 23; Ezek. 34:27; 39:23-29; Hos. 11:11; Joel 3:1-2, 8; Amos 9:14; Mic. 2:12-13; 4:6-7; 5:6; 7:12; Zeph. 3:19-20; Zech. 9:11-12; 10:10-11; 13:8; 14:2; cf. Mt. 25:43; Lk. 21:24).

2. Moses’ prophecy of Israel being scattered and in captivity (Deut. 28:64) was partially fulfilled at the hands of Assyria (721 BC), Babylon (586 BC), and Rome (AD 70).

3. Christians enduring persecution in end-time prophecy must also be understood (Mt. 24:9; Lk. 21:16-19; Jn. 15:18-25; Rev. 6:9-11; 12:11, 17; 13:7, 10; 16:5-7; 17:6; 18:24; 19:2; 20:4).

B. One of the most offensive aspects of the Lord’s end-time plan—to a humanistic mind set—is that He will allow some Jewish people and Christians go into captivity—some in prison camps.

>6“…I will give You [Messiah] as a covenant to the people…7to bring out prisoners from the prison, those who sit in darkness from the prison house…” 22But this is a people robbed and plundered; all of them are snared in holes, and they are hidden in prison houses… 23Who among you will give ear to this?… 24Who gave Jacob for plunder, and Israel to the robbers? Was it not the LORD, He against whom we have sinned? (Isa. 42:6-24)
