
# Session #3 Five Reasons We Value Studying the End Times

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. A FEW FOUNDATIONAL THOUGHTS

A. The IHOPKC team holds convictions which differ from the popular view that the Church will be secretly raptured before the Tribulation and will miss the greatest revival in history (Joel 2:28-32; Rev. 7:9; 19:7; 22:17). We honor the godliness and biblical scholarship of many who hold this view but see it as a mistake that leaves multitudes spiritually unprepared as events escalate. I recommend “Not Afraid of the Antichrist—Why we do not believe in a Pre-tribulation Rapture” by Drs M. Brown and C. Keener.

>29“Immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from heaven…30Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth…will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with…great glory. 31And He will send His angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather together His elect…from one end of heaven to the other. (Mt. 24:29-31)

## II. 5 REASONS WE VALUE STUDYING WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS ABOUT THE END TIMES

A. Reason #1—unique dynamics: The generation of Jesus’ return will have unique dynamics—unprecedented pressures (shaking, sin, darkness) and an unprecedented outpouring of the Spirit. This will create a situation in which the nations will be afraid and confused searching for answers.

>2For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and deep darkness the people; but the Lord will arise over you, and His glory will be seen upon you. (Isa. 60:2)

B. Reason #2—biblical reasons: By far the most described generation in Scripture is the generation that will be alive when Jesus returns. It is the main focus in over 150 chapters in the Bible
(see mikebickle.org/resources/resource/2888 for a list of these chapters).

C. Reason #3—prophetic reasons: The biblical signs of the times include events and trends that are predicted in Scripture. Jesus, the apostles, and the OT prophets prophesied signs of the times—these signs will alert God’s people (who are alive in the generation of Jesus’ return) of His soon return.

1. Jesus commanded one generation to “know” that His return was near—this command was for the generation living when “all” 25 signs prophesied in Matthew 24 and Luke 21 occur.

>33When you see all these things [in 24:3-28], know that it [His return] is near—at the doors…
34This generation will by no means pass away till all these things [in 24:29-31] take place…
36Of that day and hour no one knows… (Mt. 24:33-36)

2. The timing: In the generation that Jesus returns, “all” 25 signs will accelerate in a way that can be “seen” by the global Body of Christ. Now, for the first time in history, most of these 25 signs of the times are increasing and making headline news on a global level.

3. The Lord indicated that a generation may last up to 100 years (Gen. 15:13-16).

D. Reason #4—the promise of increased understanding (Jer. 23:20; Dan. 11:33). There is power in knowledge. Since the Lord can accurately foretell the details of His end-time plan, we know that He has power over them and is able to use them redemptively for the good of His people.

1. The Lord will raise up “people of understanding” who will help “many” who will be hungry to understand the biblical narrative related to the end times (Dan. 11:33; 12:10).

>33“And those of the people who understand [end-time messengers] shall instruct many;
yet for many days they shall fall [be martyred] by sword and flame, by captivity…
35to refine them, purify them…until the time of the end.” (Dan. 11:33-35)

2. God will give His people “perfect,” or mature, understanding of His end-time judgments

>20The anger of the Lord [His judgments] will not turn back until He has executed…
the thoughts of His heart. In the latter days you will understand it perfectly. (Jer. 23:20)

E. Reason #5—we are alerted by 4 pastoral challenges: People must understand the biblical narrative for what will happen and why it will happen, or they will by default embrace a secular narrative of the events, making them more vulnerable to being overcome by fear, offense, lust, and deception.

F. Jesus highlighted 4 responses that will greatly challenge many people’s faith in the end times:
F.O.L.D.—Fear (Lk. 21:26), Offense (Mt. 24:10), Lust (Lk. 21:34), and Deception (Mt. 24:11)

>26“…men’s hearts failing them from fear… 34“But take heed to yourselves, lest your
hearts be weighed down with carousing [lust, immorality, etc.], drunkenness…
and that Day [Jesus’ second coming] come on you unexpectedly.” (Lk. 21:26, 34)

>10“Then many will be offended... 11Many false prophets will rise up and deceive many.” (Mt. 24:10-11)

1. Fear: The hearts of people will be overcome with fear (Lk. 21:26), if they are not properly equipped in the Word and walking in the Spirit. This applies to believers and unbelievers.

2. Offense: Many will be offended at God and one another. Some will be offended at Jesus’ leadership—since they were taught that they would be raptured before the trouble intensified.

3. Lust: The word carousing speaks of self-indulgence, with the main idea being immorality. Often people who are overwhelmed by fear, anxiety, or offense seek relief from their stress in drunkenness, drugs, immorality, etc. They “self-medicate” with lust seeking relief from pain.

4. Deception: Some of the most dangerous false prophets will be popular social commentators and media personalities who are dignified, good-looking, caring, intelligent, and well-spoken. They will promote a social narrative that is contrary to the biblical narrative and values.

G. The escalating fear, offense, lust, and deception will result in many falling away from Jesus. Paul prophesied of a “falling away” in the end times (1 Tim. 4:1-2; 2 Tim. 3:1-7; 4:3-5; cf. Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31, 39; 2 Pet. 2:1-3, 20-22; 3:17). This will be one of the most tragic realities in history. Paul presented it as being as obvious and significant as the appearing of the Antichrist on the world stage.

>3Let no one deceive you by any means; for that Day [Jesus’ return] will not come unless the falling away comes first and the man of sin [Antichrist] is revealed. (2 Thes. 2:3)
