
# Session #31 The Multi-Faceted Glory of Jesus’ Second Coming

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. OVERVIEW OF JESUS’ SECOND COMING

A. The second coming of Jesus is our hope (Titus 2:13). Jesus is passionate about coming to rescue His people, to destroy wickedness, and to fill the earth with God's glory. The saints will marvel (2 Thes. 1:10) at the pageantry associated with Jesus’ return in the glory of the Father, flaming fire, with all the angels, and music, fragrance and more. Our participation in this gives dignity to our life.

>10…when He comes to be…marveled at among all who have believed… (2 Thes. 1:10, NAS)

>12…denying worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present age, 13looking for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of our great God…Jesus. (Titus 2:12-13)

B. Jesus described His second coming in the glory of His Father (Mt. 16:27).

>27For the Son of Man will come in the glory of His Father with His angels… (Mt. 16:27)

C. The glory of Jesus’ return will be like a multi-faceted diamond (Mt. 24:29-32). Jesus was preparing His people to overcome by understanding the glory of who He is and what He will do when He returns. This passage gives us a glimpse into the joy that He had in anticipating being with His Father on Sunday and knowing that He would return in the future in splendor and glory (Heb. 12:2).

>29Immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken. 30Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear…all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man comings…with great glory. 31He will send His angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather His elect [the rapture] from…one end of heaven to the other. (Mt. 24:29-32)

D. Jesus will return in the glory of the Father (Mt. 16:27) leading His royal procession to Jerusalem. (Ps. 68:24, 33) across the sky with all the saints (1 Thes. 3:13) and all the angels (Mt. 16:27; 25:31; Mk. 8:38; Lk. 9:26; 2 Thes. 1:7) as He travels across the whole earth—being seen by every person (Mt. 24:30; Rev. 1:7). He will raise the dead in Christ and then rapture believers who are alive on earth (Mt. 24:30-31; 1 Thes. 3:13; 4:14, 17). He will come in great power (Mk. 13:26), flaming fire (2 Thes. 1:8), and with the brightness and energy of lightning (Mt. 24:27). He will descend from heaven with a shout, the voice of an archangel, and the trumpet of God (1 Thes. 4:14-16). The sun and moon will be darkened as the stars fall and the very heavens are shaken (Mt. 24:29). The Father will turn the lights out across the whole earth and then suddenly turn them on to announce Jesus’ royal procession back to Jerusalem. This will be the largest gathering in history that will include several billion resurrected and raptured believers (1 Thes. 3:13; 4:17) and billions of angels (25:31).

E. There are many passages in the New Testament that highlight Jesus' second coming (Mt. 10:23; 16:27; 23:39; 24:27-31, 38-44; 25:31-32; Lk. 9:26; 13:35; 18:8; Jn. 14:1-3; Acts 1:6-13; 1 Cor. 4:5; 1 Thes. 3:13; 4:14-17; 5:1-6; 2 Thes. 1:10; 2:3; Heb. 10:37; Jude 14; Rev. 1:7; 3:11; 11:15-18; 16:15; 19:11-21; 22:7, 12, 20; etc.

F. There are many passages in the Old Testament that highlight Jesus' second coming (Ps. 2:8-9; 24:7-10; 45:3-5; 68:32-35; 72:5-11; 96:10, 13; 98:9; 102:15-22; 110:5-6; Isa. 2:2-4, 10-21; 9:6-7; 11:1-16; 24:20-23; 27:12-13; 30:26-33; 34:1-4; 40:3-5, 10-11; 42:10-15; 59:16-21; 62:10-63:6; 64:1-3; Jer. 23:5-6; 25:30-33; 33:14-16; Dan. 7:13-14, 27; Joel 3:12-17; Mic. 2:12-13; 4:1-3; 5:4; 7:14-17; Hab. 3:3-15; Zech. 1:16; 2:10-13; 6:12-13; 8:1-3; 9:14-16; 10:11; 12:10; 14:3-10; etc.

## II. SPECIFIC FACETS OF JESUS’ GLORY THAT WILL BE MANIFEST DURING HIS RETURN

A. Jesus prophesied His procession across the sky—saying that it will be seen by all (Mt. 24:29-31). Jesus will lead a royal procession across the sky with all the saints (1 Thes. 3:13) and all the angels (Mt. 25:31) as He travels across the whole earth—being seen by every person (Mt. 24:30; Rev. 1:7).

>29…after the tribulation…the sun will be darkened… 30Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes …will see the Son of Man coming…with great glory. (Mt. 24:29-30)

1. In my opinion “the sign” of the Son of Man is His royal procession across the sky (Mt. 24:30)

2. All the angels will come with Jesus when returns (Mt. 25:31).

>31“…the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him…” (Mt. 25:31)

3. All the saints will come with Jesus when returns (1 Thes. 3:13).

>13“…at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints.” (1 Thes. 3:13)

4. Everyone on the earth will see Him (Mt. 24:30; Rev. 1:7)

>7Behold, He is coming with clouds, and every eye will see Him… (Rev. 1:7)

5. For Jesus to be seen by every eye requires that He makes a global procession in the sky over every inhabited place on earth. Some suggest that all will see Him via technology. I do not think that people would be convinced so as “to mourn” if they only saw Him by technology.

6. Since the earth is round, it is impossible for all the people on the earth to see Him at the same time. He will need to be seen in each longitude and latitude of all the inhabited places on earth as He arrives over their region. At what height and speed will Jesus travel so as to be recognizable to people on the earth with the naked eye? His procession across the sky requires that Jesus be close enough and slow enough for each person to interpret what is going on so as to cause them to mourn (Mt. 24:30; Rev. 1:7) over having rejected Him previously.

7. Jesus will not be in a hurry to rush through this seeking to complete His procession in a few moments. His procession across the sky will be the most glorious public event in all history.

B. Psalm 68 gives insight into Jesus’ procession across the sky on clouds to His temple in Jerusalem. David “book-ends” this song by describing the Messiah as “Him who rides on clouds” (68:4, 33). This is the most stunning cosmic display of power and beauty that has or will ever occur.

>4Sing to God…extol Him who rides on the clouds… 24They have seen Your procession, O God, the procession of my God, my King, into the sanctuary [the temple]… 29Because of Your temple at Jerusalem, kings will bring presents to You…32Sing to God, you kingdoms of the earth… 33to Him who rides on the heaven of heavens.” (Ps. 68:4, 24-33)

C. The Lord’s procession into the sanctuary in Jerusalem is the high point of all history (68:24-27).

D. Jesus will raise the dead in Christ and then rapture believers who are alive on earth (Mt. 24:30-31; 1 Thes. 3:13; 4:14, 17). This will be the largest gathering in history that will include several billion resurrected and raptured believers and billions of angels. It is a cosmic event of great glory that we will never forget. It will be the first time that all of God’s family from all history will meet together

>14...God will bring with Him [Jesus] those who sleep [believers who had died] in Jesus… 16For the dead in Christ will rise first. 17Then we who are alive and remain shall be caught up [raptured] with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. (1 Thes. 4:14-17)

>51…We shall not all sleep [die], but we shall all be changed— 52in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet…the dead will be raised incorruptible… (1 Cor. 15:51-52)

E. Jesus will come in great power, flaming fire, and with the brightness and energy of lightning.

>26Then they will see the Son of Man coming in the clouds with great power and glory. (Mk 13:26)

>7…Jesus is revealed from heaven…8in flaming fire taking vengeance on those… (2 Thes. 1:7-8)

>15The LORD will come with fire and with His chariots,…to render His anger… (Isa. 66:15)

>17And Elisha prayed…then the LORD opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw. And behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha. (2 Kgs. 6:17)

>11I saw…a white horse. And He [Jesus] who sat on him was called Faithful and True… 14And the armies in heaven…followed Him on white horses. (Rev. 19:11-14)

F. He will descend from heaven with a shout, the voice of an archangel, and the trumpet of God

>16[Jesus] will descend…with a shout, with the voice of an archangel, and with the trumpet of God. (1 Thes. 4:16)

>31He will send His angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather His elect… (Mt. 24:31)

>7…in the days of the sounding of the seventh angel…the mystery of God would be finished… (Rev. 10:7)

G. When Jesus returns, He will shout or roar so that all the earth trembles before Him (Isa. 30:30; 42:13; Jer. 25:30; Hos. 11:10; Joel 2:11; 3:16; 1 Thes. 4:16).

>30The LORD will cause His glorious voice to be heard and show the descent of His arm, with the indignation of His anger and…with scattering, tempest, and hailstones. (Isa. 30:30)

>22I will bring him [the Antichrist] to judgment…I will rain down on him… and on the many peoples who are with him, flooding rain, great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. (Ezek. 38:22)

>16The LORD also will roar from Zion…the heavens and earth will shake… (Joel 3:16)

>30 The LORD will roar from on high…He will give a shout…against all the inhabitants of the earth. 31…the LORD has a controversy with the nations; (Jer. 25:30-31)

H. The New Testament emphasizes that Jesus is coming back in the heavenly clouds of glory (Mt. 24:30; 26:64; Mk. 13:26; Lk. 21:27; Acts 1:9-11; 1 Thes. 4:17; Rev. 1:7; 14:14-16).

>14…behold, a white cloud, and on the cloud sat One like the Son of Man…” 16He who sat on the cloud thrust in His sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped. (Rev. 14:14-16)

I. The Old Testament references the Lord coming on clouds in a whirlwind with fire and more.

>13Behold, One like the Son of Man [Jesus], coming with the clouds of heaven! (Dan. 7:13)

J. The sun and moon will be darkened as the stars fall and the very heavens are shaken (Mt. 24:29). The Father will turn the lights out across the whole earth and then suddenly turn them on to announce Jesus’ royal procession back to Jerusalem.

## III. THE END-TIME PRAYER MOVEMENT AND JESUS’ SECOND COMING (42:10-17)

A. Isaiah prophesied a global intercessory worship movement (42:10-13) that will be connected to Jesus’ return (42:13) and the release of His end-time judgments (42:14-15). In 42:10-12, we see how beautifully the Body of Christ in the nations will respond to Jesus’ end-time leadership.

>10Sing to the LORD a new song, and His praise from the ends of the earth, you who go down to the sea, and all that is in it, you coastlands… 11Let the wilderness and its cities lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar [Saudi Arabia] inhabits. Let the inhabitants of Sela [Jordan] sing… 13The LORD shall go forth [Jesus’ return] like a mighty man; He shall stir up His zeal like a man of war. He shall cry out, yes, shout aloud; He shall prevail against His enemies…” 14“I have been still and restrained Myself. Now I will cry like a woman in labor, I will pant and gasp at once. 15I will lay waste the mountains and hills [earthquakes]…” (Isa. 42:10-15)

B. The LORD shall go forth like a mighty man of war: The Lord will show Himself to be a warrior (Ex. 15; Judg. 5; Isa. 28:21; 30:30-31; 31:4; 59:16-18; 63:3-4; Zech. 9:14; 14:3).

C. He shall prevail against His enemies: Jesus will prevail against His enemies by releasing His judgments against the Antichrist’s empire (Isa. 42:14-15).

D. I will lay waste mountains: He will lay waste mountains by earthquakes. Isaiah highlighted earthquakes and drought (42:15) that are described in the prophets and in the book of Revelation which will destroy the Antichrist’s resources and infrastructures (Isa. 2:10, 19, 21; 13:13; 29:6; Ezek. 38:19; Hag. 2:6, 21; Zech. 14:4-5; Heb. 12:26-27; Rev. 6:14; 8:5; 11:13; 16:18-20).

>18There was a great earthquake…as had not occurred since men were on the earth… (Rev. 16:18)

E. Revelation 22:17 prophesied of the Church in unity with what the Spirit is saying and doing. As sons of God, we are to experience God’s throne as heirs of His power (Rom. 8:17). As the Bride of Christ, we are to experience God’s heart (emotions for us). Jesus is a King with power and a Bridegroom with desire. He is looking for relationship, not just a kingdom workforce.

>17The Spirit and the Bride say, “Come!”… 20He who testifies to these things says, “Surely I am coming quickly.” Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus! (Rev. 22:17-20)
