
# Session #6 The Beginning of Birth Pains: 12 Signs

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. SIGNS OF THE TIMES INDICATING JESUS’ RETURN

A. Review: There are 3 prophetic time frames related to the final 7 years of this age (Dan. 9:27; Mt. 24:8; 1 Thes. 5:2-3) they are the beginning of birth pains (possibly starting in 1948 or 1967), worldwide counterfeit peace and safety (3½ years), and the Great Tribulation.

B. Jesus identified 25 signs of the times—23 are negative (Mt. 24; Mk. 13; Lk. 21). He highlighted 12 negative trends as the “beginning of birth pains” that will increase throughout the generation that He returns (Mt. 24:4-8; Lk. 21:8-11). He identified 5 negative trends that will increase “after” the beginning of birth pains and escalate during the final 7 years of this age (Mt. 24:9-12). He identified 8 signs that will occur in the 3½ years of the Tribulation (Mt. 24:14-28; Lk. 21:20, 24).

C. For the first time in history, most of these are increasing and making headline news globally.

D. The most-repeated warning in Scripture about the end times is not to be deceived—deception will cause many to fall away from Jesus (Mt. 24:11; 2 Thes. 2:3; 1 Tim. 4:1-2; 2 Tim. 3:1-7; 4:3-5).

E. We are spiritually prepared as we gain “living understanding” of Jesus and His excellent leadership. The Lord will raise up “people of understanding” who will help others to understand the biblical end-time narrative (Dan. 11:33; 12:10; Jer. 23:20; 30:24).

>33Those of the people who understand [end-time messengers] shall instruct many… (Dan. 11:33)

>20…the LORD [in judgment] will not turn back…in the latter days you will understand it perfectly. (Jer. 23:20)

## II. BEGINNING OF BIRTH PAINS: 1ST PROPHETIC TIME FRAME BEFORE JESUS RETURNS

A. The earth will go through a “birth canal,” resulting in a new world order—the Millennium.

B. Jesus gave 12 negative sign trends as “the beginning” of birth pains (Mt. 24:4-8; Lk. 21:11, 25). Matthew described 8 trends (24:4-5). Luke 21 identified 9 trends (21:9-11, 25)—5 of these trends are mentioned in Matthew 24 and 4 of them are not highlighted by Matthew—commotions (21:9), fearful sights (21:11), great signs from heaven (21:11), and perplexity at the sea (21:25).

1. Deception and false christs: Many will come in Jesus’ name and deceive many (Mt. 24:5).

2. Wars: There will be military and political conflict (Mt. 24:6; Mk. 13:7; Lk. 21:9).

3. Rumors of war: Rumors stirring fear with many implications—financial, social, political.

4. Ethnic conflict: Civil disorder and racism—nation (ethnos) against nation (Mt. 24:7).

5. Economic warfare: Economic-related hostility, aggression, and conflict (Mt. 24:7)

6. Famines: Massive food shortages (Mt. 24:7) that will distress the nations (Lk. 21:25).

7. Pestilences (disease): Biological warfare will bring disease to a new intensity (Mt. 24:7).

8. Great earthquakes: Luke added “great”—in destruction and loss of life (Mt. 24:7; Lk. 21:11)

9. Commotions: There will be chaotic events in society and creation (Lk. 21:9).

10. Fearful sights: Terrorizing occurrences causing many to be struck with fear (Lk. 21:9, 26)

11. Great signs from heaven: Signs in the sky and related to the weather (Lk. 21:11)

12. Perplexity at the roaring of the sea (Lk. 21:25)

C. During this time, also watch for the following political and religious developments:

1. Rebuilding the temple in Jerusalem and offering animal sacrifices (as Moses taught).

2. The emergence of a 10-nation confederation to form the basis of a world government (Rev. 17:12-17). The political, military, and economic alliances of ten nations will provide the Antichrist with the greatest power and resource base of any leader in history.

3. The emergence of Harlot Babylon as worldwide religion of great tolerance (Rev. 17) made up of people from Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, etc. The harlot Babylon will include a worldwide religious and economic network. God will judge Babylon’s religious network (Rev. 17) and economic network (Rev. 18).

4. Rebuilding of Babylon as a global economic center (Rev. 17-18). The ancient city of Babylon on the Euphrates River in Iraq was about 50 miles south of Baghdad. The Antichrist will establish a global economic center there (Jer. 50-51; Zech. 5:5-11). This center will not need to include a lot of land—possibly it may just be several hundreds of acres or so?

>6I asked, “What is it?” And he [an angel] said, “It is a basket [ephah, NAS or a measuring basket] that is going forth.” He also said, “This is their resemblance throughout the earth: 7Here…a woman sitting inside the basket…8[she] is Wickedness!”…9there were two women…they had wings…they lifted up the basket…10So I said to the angel…,“Where are they carrying the basket?” 11And he said to me, “To build a house for it in the land of Shinar [Babylon], when it is ready, the basket will be set there on its base.” (Zech. 5:6-11)

a. Vatican City is about 120 acres

b. The financial district in New York City is about 300 acres

5. A regional political leader who establishes peace in the Middle East (Dan. 9:27). The Antichrist is described as a little horn because he initially comes on the world stage as a regional political leader (Dan. 7:8; 8:9)

>9And out of one of them came a little horn [the Antichrist] which grew exceedingly great toward the south, toward the east, and toward the Glorious Land. (Dan. 8:9)
