
# Session #12 Transformed by Delighting in God’s Beauty

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. DAVID’S DETERMINATION TO SEARCH OUT GOD’S BEAUTY

A. One of King David’s lifelong goals was to intentionally search out God’s beauty (Ps. 27:4). The biblical vision of the Christian life is a lifestyle of enjoying God by delighting in His beauty.

>4One thing I have desired…all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord. (Ps. 27:4)

>4Delight yourself in the Lord, and He shall give you the desires of your heart. (Ps. 37:4)

B. If we can see what Paul saw about Jesus, then we can respond like Paul did to Jesus.

>8I also count all things loss for the excellence [beauty] of the knowledge of Christ. (Phil. 3:8)

>18We all…beholding…the glory [beauty] of the Lord, are being transformed… (2 Cor. 3:18)

C. Delighting in the beauty of Jesus is essential to walking in victory—especially in this hour when fear, lust, offense, and violence are increasing. David wrote Psalm 27 in a time of conflict (v. 1-6).

>2When the wicked came against me…3Though an army may encamp against me, my heart shall not fear… 4One thing I have desired…to behold the beauty of the Lord. (Ps. 27:2-4)

D. Isaiah prophesied that the Spirit would emphasize Jesus’ beauty (33:17) in the generation of His return, and that God’s people will find stability and strength by delighting in His beauty (33:6).

>6“…knowledge [God's beauty] will be the stability of your times, and the strength of salvation… 17“Your eyes will see the King in His beauty…” (Isa. 33:6, 17)

E. God’s beauty includes how He thinks and feels, what He does, how He looks; His creation, redemption, leadership; and how He designed humans to act and interact. His beauty is seen:  
1. In sights, sounds, fragrances—colors, brilliance, music, melodies, harmonies, fragrances  
2. In knowledge—we are moved by advances in science, medicine, technology, architecture, etc.  
3. In noble virtues—life stories of courage, generosity, compassion—bios, novels, movies, etc.  
4. In human abilities—singers, musicians, athletes, writers, artists, composers, producers  
5. In society—when justice prevails and reconciliation occurs between races, nations, etc.

## II. GOD’S BEAUTY SEEN IN CREATION

A. God is beauty itself. All the beauty that we see in this world is a dim reflection of the source of ultimate beauty—God. I have been greatly blessed by Sam Storms’ book Onething: Developing a Passion for the Beauty of God, and by Thomas Dubay’s book The Evidential Power of Beauty.

B. David exhorted us to look up to see God’s beauty in “His heavenly art gallery” (Ps. 19:1). J
John Piper refers to letting our eyes run up the beam of beauty in creation to the “Original Beauty.”

>1The heavens declare the glory [beauty] of God. (Ps. 19:1)
