
# Session #13 Our Deep Longing to be Enjoyed by God

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. THE SEVEN LONGINGS OF THE HUMAN HEART

A. God created the human spirit with seven longings that draw us to Him and reflect His glory in us. They are the longing for the assurance that we are enjoyed by God, the longing to be fascinated, the longing to be beautiful, the longing to be great, the longing for intimacy without shame, the longing to be wholehearted (passionate), and the longing to for significance with lasting impact. In the overflow of God touching these longings in us we find power to extravagantly love Him.

B. For FREE resources on this, see mikebickle.org for my e-book 7 Longings of the Human Heart.

C. These seven longings or cravings give us insight into how God created and designed our spirit. Each longing is a reflection of God’s personality. We are made in His image, thus, we have these longings. God put these desires into us to help us walk with Him as His eternal companion forever. Therefore, we cannot remove these longings by repenting of them.

D. God's love is supernaturally poured out or imparted to our hearts by the Spirit.

>5The love of God has been poured out in our hearts by the Holy Spirit... (Rom. 5:5)

## II. OUR DEEP LONGING TO BE ENJOYED BY GOD

A. Every person was created with a deep longing in our heart to be pursued, delighted in, and enjoyed, first by God and then by our families and friends. Understanding God’s affection for us is where we begin our journey into a life of being exhilarated in God’s love.

B. In John 15:9, Jesus declared the two most important truths in the Bible (that the Father loves Jesus; and that Jesus loves His people with the same intensity). The way God loves God (15:9a) is the greatest love story—it overflows to His people (15:9b). These two verses set us on a life long journey and trajectory of being transformed by God's love.

>9“As the Father loved Me, I also have loved you; abide [stay engaged] in My love.” (Jn. 15:9)

>26And I [Jesus] have declared [revealed] to them Your name [glory], and will declare it, that the love with which You [the Father] loved Me may be in them…” (Jn. 17:26)

1. I pray, “Thank you, Jesus, for the way You love me (Jn. 15:9b). Show me more! Holy Spirit, let me see what You see and feel what You feel about the love Jesus has for me.”

2. I pray, “Thank you, Jesus for revealing the Father to me (Jn. 17:26a). Show me more! Holy Spirit, let me see what Jesus’ sees and feel about the Father.”

3. I pray, “Thank you, Father, for the way You love Jesus, impart it in me (Jn. 17:26b).

C. God's kingdom is secure forever because of Jn. 15:9 and 17:26

D. After Jesus paid the full debt of our sin, He cried out “It is finished.” There is no longer any condemnation in God's presence for a sincere believer in Jesus (Rom. 8:1)

>1There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus…. (Rom. 8:1)

>32He who did not spare His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not…freely give us all things? 33Who shall bring a charge against God’s elect? It is God who justifies. 34Who is he who condemns? It is Christ…who also makes intercession for us. (Rom. 8:32-34)

E. I believe the most prevailing stronghold of the mind is related to the fear of rejection and the trauma of shame. The feeling that we have gone too far in our sin to be forgiven. We are emotionally depleted and even devastated if we “feel” rejected by God, even though it is a lie from the enemy.

F. Our deep longing to be enjoyed (loved) is touched as we receive the revelation of God's emotions (affections) as Father and Bridegroom. We must feed on the biblical revelation of God’s affections.

G. The foundation of this begins with understanding the finished work of the cross. When we understand what Jesus did on the cross, then we can understand why He did it.

H. Our Bridegroom King desires, pursues and enjoys us as His Bride. When our heart is assured that we are deeply enjoyed, then something powerful is awakened within us. Over time, this truth changes our emotional chemistry. It seems too good to be true, but it is gloriously true.

>10I am my Beloved's, and His desire is toward me. (Song 7:10)

I. There is a great difference between rebellion against God and spiritual maturity. God is angry at rebellion but acts tenderly towards those who are immature yet sincere in their desire to obey Him.

J. It is not so difficult to believe that God enjoys us in heaven. However, God enjoys His relationship with His spiritually immature children who are sincere!

K. When Jesus corrects us with His discipline, He does not reject us. He corrects us because He so desires us. We often mistake correction with rejection.

>12 For whom the LORD loves He corrects, just as a father the son in whom he delights. (Prov. 3:12)

L. Jesus satisfies our deep longing to be enjoyed by God. He does this by revealing to us that we are pursued and desired by Him. In the assurance of being enjoyed our hearts will be set afire.

For FREE resources on this subject, see mikebickle.org for a 12-part teaching series with notes titled Abiding in Love: Experiencing the Heart of God.
