
# Session #14 The Assurance of Being Enjoyed by God (Lk. 15)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. JESUS REVEALED THE FATHER (LK. 15)

A. In Luke 15, Jesus gave three parables that have profound implications for our lives today. The parables of the lost sheep (15:4-7), the lost coin (15:8-10), and the lost son (15:11-32). This chapter gives us one of the most significant revelations of God the Father in the Scripture.

B. In these parables, Jesus revealed God’s personality and how He pursues us, enjoys us, shows mercy, and feels affection for us as our heavenly Father. The truth that Jesus most emphasized in Luke 15 is that the Father rejoices as He forgives and restores His people (Lk. 15: 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 23, 32). In other words, He enjoys relationship with His people even in their weakness

C. The truth of God’s fatherhood was a dramatic new teaching to Israel who viewed God mostly as their transcendent Creator who has great power and holiness.

D. Our greatest emotional need is to have the assurance that we are enjoyed by God even in our weakness. Every person was created with a longing to be delighted in and enjoyed by God.

E. A prevailing stronghold in many today is related to the fear of rejection and the trauma of shame.

F. God is our Father to whom we are to draw near with assurance that He enjoys us.

>19Therefore…having boldness to enter the Holiest [God’s presence] by the blood of Jesus… 22let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith… (Heb. 10:19-22)

G. The way we view God’s heart toward us in our sin and weakness affects how we approach God. This question is one of the most important issues in our spiritual journey.

1. It determines if we run “to God” or “from God” when we stumble in our sin or weakness.

2. Our view of God’s emotions affects how we relate to God in our sin, failures, and weakness and how we feel about ourselves.

H. The view of many is that God is mostly mad or mostly sad when He relates to us. One of the most important questions in our spiritual journey is: how does God feel when He looks at me?

>4…You shall be called Hephzibah…for the LORD delights in you… 5as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you. (Isa. 62:5)

I. Jesus walked in the anointing of gladness more than any man in history (Heb. 1:9). Gladness and joy are at the center of Jesus’ personality. David described God’s heart as full of joy and pleasures (Ps. 16:11). Jesus heart posture and leadership style flows from His joy and gladness.

>9God has anointed You [Jesus] with the oil of gladness more than Your companions. Heb. 1:9)

>11In Your presence is fullness of joy; at Your right hand are pleasures forevermore. (Ps. 16:11)

>27Honor and majesty are before Him; strength and gladness are in His place. (1 Chr 16:27)

J. Jesus imparts His joy to His people (Jn. 15:11). Understanding God’s gladness brings joy that strengthens the hearts of God’s people (Neh. 8:10).

>11These things I spoke...that My joy may remain in you...that your joy may be full. (Jn. 15:11)

>10For the joy of the LORD is your strength. (Neh. 8:10)

K. God delights in and rejoices over His people (Deut. 30:9; Isa. 62:4; 65:19; Jer. 32:41; Zeph. 3:17).

>4…But you shall be called Hephzibah…for the LORD delights in you… 5as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you. (Isa. 62:4-5)

>9…for the LORD will again rejoice over you for good as He rejoiced over your fathers... (Deut. 30:9)

>41Yes, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will assuredly plant them in this land, with all My heart and with all My soul. (Jer. 32:41)

>17He will rejoice over you with gladness…He will rejoice over you with singing. (Zeph. 3:17)

L. Paul’s dramatic declaration that we have become a new creation in Christ, with all things becoming new, has vast implications. The “he” that is a new creation is our born-again spirit.

>17If anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation; old things have passed away…all things have become new…21that we [our spirit] might become the righteousness of God. (2 Cor. 5:17-21)

>12“I will be merciful to their iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more.” (Heb. 8:12)

>1There is…now no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus… (Rom. 8:1)

>10…for the accuser of our brethren, who accused them before our God day and night, has been cast down. (Rev. 12:10)

For FREE resources on this subject, see mikebickle.org for a 12-part teaching series with notes titled Abiding in Love: Experiencing the Heart of God and for a free e-book, 7 Longings of the Human Heart.
