
# Session #15 How the Father Feels About Backsliders Who Return to Him

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. JESUS REVEALED THE FATHER (LK. 15)

A. In Luke 15, Jesus gave three parables that have profound implications for our lives today. The parables of the lost sheep (15:4-7), the lost coin (15:8-10), and the lost son (15:11-32). This chapter gives us one of the most significant revelations of God the Father in the Scripture.

B. In these parables, Jesus revealed God’s personality—how He pursues us and feels affection for us. The truth that Jesus most emphasized here is that God rejoices as He restores His people (15:4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 23, 32). In other words, He enjoys relationship with His people even in their weakness.

## II. THE PARABLE OF THE LOST SON (LK. 15:11-32): THE PRODIGAL SON

A. This is a parable of how the Father responds to a backsliding son or prodigal who rebels against Him. The prodigal son wanted his father to hurry up and die so he could get his inheritance. He wanted his father’s power, wealth, and influence, without having relationship with his father.

>11He said: “A certain man had two sons. 12And the younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me’…13The younger son…journeyed to a far country, and there wasted his possessions with prodigal living. 14But when he had spent all… 15Then he…joined himself [to one who]…sent him into his fields to feed swine. (Lk. 15:11-15)

B. The son repented (as expressed in 15:18, 21), but had a wrong view of himself before his father. The son acknowledged his sin and genuinely repented (15:17). The son knew that there was nothing that he could do to be worthy of forgiveness or to earn his father’s love. So, offered himself to his father as a hired servant as one who would work for all that he received (15:19).

>17When he came to himself [repentance], he said, “How many of my father’s hired servants have bread enough…and I perish with hunger! 18I will arise and go to my father, and will say to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you, 19and I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired servants.’” (Lk. 15:17-19)

C. Jesus described how His Father responds when His people repent. This parable is not first about a son who lost his inheritance, but about a father who lost his son. Next, it is about how he responds to his son to restore him. Thus, it is about how Jesus wants His people to respond.

>20And he arose and came to his father. But when he was still a great way off, his father saw him and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. (Lk. 15:20)

1. Saw: The father watched earnestly for the return of his son.

2. Compassion: The father had tender feeling instead of anger towards the prodigal son.

3. Ran: The father had enthusiasm, though fathers in the ancient world did not run like this.

4. Fell on his neck: The father embraced him instead of being disgusted and angry.

5. Kissed: The father’s kiss signified the restoration of favor

D. The son only mentioned the first two statements that he had originally planned in verse 19. We can have a new beginning with God as a first-class citizen after we sincerely repent. We “push delete” and then stand before God with confidence.

>21And the son said to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and in your sight, and am no longer worthy to be called your son.” (Lk. 15:21)

E. The father interrupted his son’s confession and gave him the best robes, the family ring, and new shoes, along with killing a fatted calf to host a feast to celebrate the return of his son (v. 22-24).

>22The father said to his servants, “Bring out the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet. 23And bring the fatted calf here and kill it, and let us eat and be merry; 24for my son was dead and is alive again…” They began to be merry. (Lk. 15:22-24)

1. Best robe: These were reserved for honored guests. God provides the new garment.

2. Ring: Authority was entrusted to him to represent the family business in the community.

3. Sandals: Slaves did not have sandals; only the children received such family privileges.

4. Fatted calf: A calf was killed for special occasions and provided meat for over fifty guests.

5. Be merry: The Father enjoys the prodigal on the very day he repents, even with many areas in their life that need transformation.

F. Sum: God feels gladness over His returning “prodigals” and restores them to His favor. We see this in the way the father gave his son the best robe and family ring on the very day he returned. We must break our agreement with the enemy’s lies and with the trauma of shame.

G. The Father calls all in His family to rejoice with Him in the recovery of His children.

>25His older son…heard music and dancing…28He was angry and would not go in. Therefore his father came out and pleaded with him. 29So he…said to his father, “These many years I have been serving you; I never transgressed your commandment…you never gave me a young goat, that I might make merry with my friends. 30But as soon as this son of yours came…you killed the fatted calf.” 31He said, “Son…all that I have is yours. 32It was right that we should make merry and be glad, for your brother was dead and is alive again…” (Lk. 15:25-32)

1. Angry: The elder son was angry and would not participate in the celebration.

2. Pleaded: The father pleaded with the son to enter the celebration.

3. I never transgressed: The son had no sense of his sin or weakness and thus had little gratitude for his father’s kindness (v. 29). The elder son saw his years with his father as “servitude” for which he did not receive proper recognition or repayment.

4. This son of yours: The elder son had accusations and criticism against his brother.

5. All is yours: The remainder of the inheritance belonged to the elder son.

6. It is right to be glad: The Holy Spirit is proclaiming this message to us and through us.

For FREE resources on this subject, see mikebickle.org for a 12-part teaching series with notes titled Abiding in Love: Experiencing the Heart of God and for a free e-book, 7 Longings of the Human Heart.
