
# Session #17 Ministering in the Overflow of Seeing the Bridegroom King (Hos. 2)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. INTRODUCTION

A. The themes of the book of Hosea are Israel’s unfaithfulness, judgment, and end-time restoration.

1. God compared Hosea’s unfaithful wife to the nation of Israel (2:2-13).

2. Hosea endured the pain of his wife engaging in adultery. The Lord wanted Hosea’s pain-filled marriage to be prophetic picture of how the Lord felt about His marriage to Israel. Hosea’s story is told in Hosea 1-3.

B. The Bride of Christ message (2:16-20) is given in context to God disciplining His people. Only by understanding His heart as a Bridegroom can we rightly interpret or proclaim His judgments. The One who judges loves so much that He will remove all that hinders love.

C. The way Lord relates to Israel mirrors how He relates to the body of Christ. The Lord remains faithful to love His people even after unfaithfulness.

>14“...I will allure her, will bring her into the wilderness [under divine discipline], and speak comfort to her. 15I will give her...the Valley of Achor as a door of hope; she shall sing there... 16And it shall be, in that day...that you will call Me ‘My Husband’...” (Hos. 2:14-16)

1. I will allure her: God’s main way of turning His people from unfaithfulness is by His kindness and beauty. The Lord will graciously allure Israel after a season discipline.

2. Speak comfort: God’s messengers are to speak God’s comfort to Jerusalem

>1“Comfort, yes, comfort My people!” Says your God. 2“Speak comfort to Jerusalem…” (Isa. 40:1-2)

3. She shall sing there: God will awaken Israel to His love and she with new songs of love to Him and about Him even in midst of her struggles in the wilderness.

4. Valley of Achor: The valley of Achor is the place of Achan’s sin and judgment (Josh. 7). The expression “valley of Achor” became proverbial for that which causes trouble.

## II. ISRAEL WILL ACCEPT JESUS AS MESSIAH HUSBAND HOS. 2:16-20

A. Israel will accept Jesus as Messiah as they see Him as their Husband!

>16In that day, that you will call Me ‘My Husband’…” 19I will betroth you to Me forever; yes, I will betroth you to Me in righteousness and justice, in lovingkindness and mercy; 20I will betroth you to Me in faithfulness, and you shall know the LORD. (Hos. 2:16-20)

B. My husband: All Israel will saved in context to revelation of Jesus’ the Bridegroom King.

C. Betroth: The Lord wants to marry His people not just forgive them and then use them.

D. You: The Lord speaks this to people who He frees from the spirit of harlotry.

E. In righteousness: The work of righteousness in His people includes freeing them from the tyranny of sin, and empowering them to enjoy emotional transformation

F. In justice: The Lord will establish at society where all are safe and treated with honor.

G. In lovingkindness: Jesus has many good plans for His people that express His affection for them.

H. In mercy: He is so gracious with the failures of His people. Our weakness and failure do not disqualify us.

I. In faithfulness: He is true to everything He says about Himself and to us.
