
# Session #19 How To Ignite a Boring Prayer Life (Jn. 15:7)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. I

A. Intercessors burn out without a foundation of intimacy with Jesus (or abiding). Jesus is not just our King with power; He is also our Bridegroom with a deep desire for relationship with His people.

>4“You shall be called Hephzibah...for the LORD delights in you… 5For as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you. 6I have set watchmen [intercessors] on your walls…they shall never hold their peace [be silent, NAS] day or night…” (Isa. 62:4-6)

B. The message in Isaiah 62:4-5 is that Jesus is our Bridegroom God who delights in His people. This truth is essential to sustaining prayer in Isaiah 62:6. Both the message of the Bridegroom God (62:4) and continual prayer (62:6) are essential to the forerunner message in Isaiah. 62:10-63:6.

C. In November of 1995, I had a prophetic dream exhorting me to call God’s people, “Hephzibah.” I heard a loud voice like thunder say, “Call them Hephzibah, the Lord delights in you.” The “Hephzibah message” is that God delights in us and rejoices over us as a Bridegroom rejoices over a bride. It is the same as the Song of Solomon message or David’s “beauty of God” message.

## II. THE GREAT PRIVILEGE OF LIVING TO GLORIFY GOD (JN. 15:7-8)

A. The most glorious life possible is to live being empowered to glorify God by bearing fruit and by engaging in breakthrough prayer through intimacy and intercession (15:5-7).

B. In 15:7-8, Jesus applied the “parable of the vine” in 15:1-6, emphasizing the promise and privilege of answered prayer that glorifies God. John 14 highlights the grace available to us, while John 15 highlights the responsibility of a believer with an emphasis on “you” which occurs 22x in John 15.

>7If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, you will ask what you desire, and it shall be done… 8By this My Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit. (Jn. 15:7-8)

C. If you abide in Me: The main activity of a believer related to growing in God is to abide in Christ. It involves three things: talking with God, applying His promises, and obeying His leadership. Abiding in Christ speaks of our on-going dialogue with God with active trust in His Word (promises, warnings, doctrines, etc.) and a spirit of obedience flowing from mutual affection.

D. My words abide in you: Jesus’ “words” refer to His teachings and what He speaks to us by the Spirit. We are to be absorbed in conversation with Him related to His teachings and promises. The greatest pleasure available to the human race is when “God reveals God to the human spirit” as the Spirit reveals and writes the Scripture on our heart (Heb. 10:16; cf. Lk. 24:32; Eph. 1:17).

>16…I will put My laws into their hearts, and in their minds I will write them. (Heb. 10:16)

1. Jesus’ word abiding in us empowers us in several ways including the following:  
a). To sustain an on-going conversation with Him (that we might love, serve, and obey Him);  
b). To boldly and clearly speak His word as faithful witnesses in the cultural wars (Ps. 2);  
c). To be able to equip others to follow Jesus and understand His end-time plans (Dan. 11:33).

2. David said that the Scripture is perfect and has power to transform and delight our heart. We are to be loyal to Jesus’ teaching as the only perfect and reliable guide to true spirituality.

>7The law of the LORD [God’s Word] is perfect, converting [transforming] the soul… 8rejoicing the heart…enlightening the eyes… 10More to be desired are they than gold… sweeter than honey… 11And in keeping them there is great reward. (Ps. 19:7-11)

3. The Lord told Joshua that he would be empowered to be courageous, obedient, and prosperous by engaging in long and loving meditation on God’s word (Josh. 1:7-9).

>7Only be strong and very courageous…8This Book of the Law [the Scripture]…you shall meditate in it day and night, that you may observe to do [obey]…all that is written in it. Then you will make your way prosperous, and…have good success. (Josh. 1:7-8)

>1Blessed is the man…2[whose] his delight is in [the Scripture]…he meditates day and night. 3He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth its fruit… (Ps. 1:1-3)

E. Our greatest dream is to love Jesus with all our heart and to do good for His name by living in a way that shows people the excellence of His leadership by our joyful embrace of obedience even in mundane and difficult tasks. It is worth it regardless how difficult or how long the journey. It is a great miracle for weak people to be used by God to show glimpses of His glory and beauty in a dark world filled with people who do not often or easily recognize His excellent leadership.

>12The word of God is living and powerful…. a discerner of the…intents of the heart. (Heb. 4:12)
