
# Session #23 The Glory of God's Emotions (Exodus 34:6)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. CHRISTIANITY IS THE PURSUIT OF A PERSON

A. Christianity is actively pursuing a Person and actively resisting sin, sickness, and Satan. It is more than escaping from hell, obeying a code of conduct and fulfilling a ministry assignment. Many live a “defensive Christianity;” they focus on sincerely resisting darkness, but do not aggressively pursue Jesus. This approach is weak and ineffective and does not change our inner man. As we focus on the holy preoccupation of pursuing Jesus, we will be strong and effective.

B. The power of our Christian experience is found in interacting with the person Christ Jesus. Jesus is a glorious person, yet so many do not enjoy relating to Him. We are to introduce people to the glory of Jesus and the adventure of discovering His splendor. The only way to keep from losing ground in our spiritual life is to gain new ground in our understanding and experience.

>8I count all things loss for the excellence of the knowledge of Christ Jesus… (Phil. 3:8)

## II. HIGHEST MANIFESTATION OF GOD’S GLORY: REVELATION OF HIS EMOTIONS

A. Moses prayed to see God’s glory (beauty). God answered Moses by promising to reveal His goodness and proclaim His Name to Moses. To proclaim the Lord’s name means to reveal His character or personality, especially His emotions. Moses heard God preaching on God. God has the best personality. He is the most kind, good, pure, happy, smart, passionate Person that exists.

>18Moses said, “Please, show me Your glory.” 19Then He said, “I will make all My goodness pass before you, and I will proclaim the name of the LORD before you...” (Ex. 33:18-19)

B. The very pinnacle of God manifesting His glory is when He reveals His heart (emotions.) We go deep in our understanding of each emotion by thanking God for them and by searching them out in Scripture. The end result: we live with the assurance that He enjoys us, which leads to confident partnership with Him. When we have confidence before God, we run to Him instead of from Him even in our weakness. One way that we glorify God is by agreeing with these aspects of His heart: we receive them, declare them, and express them to others through our behavior.

>6The LORD…proclaimed, “The LORD, the LORD God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abounding in goodness and truth”…14The LORD, whose name is Jealous… (Ex. 34:6, 14)

C. The LORD God: First, God revealed His power and authority to direct the nations and our lives.

D. The Lord is merciful: The Lord is tender in relating to us in our weaknesses and sin. Mercy is the first aspect of His personality that He revealed to Moses; it is the one we need first and most. Some resist God’s mercy because it violates their sense of justice, knowing that they do not deserve it. At the cross, the Father satisfied the claims of justice. When we understand that Jesus bore our judgment and that justice has been satisfied, we can stand with confidence and receive mercy. The Lord delights in mercy. It is one of His favorite things to do in leading the universe.

>18Who is a God like You, pardoning iniquity…He delights in mercy. (Mic. 7:18)

1. God offers us a new start every day if we will repent of our compromises.

>22Through the LORD’s mercies we are not consumed, because His compassions fail not. 23They are new every morning; great is Your faithfulness. (Lam. 3:22-23)

2. God’s mercy in giving us forgiveness is far beyond anything we can compare it with.

>7Let the wicked forsake his way...let him return to the LORD, and He will have mercy on him...for He will abundantly pardon. 8For My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways My ways… 9For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts. (Isa. 55:7-9)

E. The Lord is gracious: He does not give us what we deserve. He is generous in how He evaluates our weak efforts to obey and serve Him. He remembers our frailty and does not reject us because of our weakness. We can be surprised and exasperated by our weakness, but God is not.

>10He has not dealt with us according to our sins, nor punished us according to our iniquities…14For He knows our frame; He remembers that we are dust. (Ps. 103:10-14)

F. He graciously rewards us for every movement of our heart and act of obedience (Mt. 10:42; Heb. 6:10). This dignifies every day of our life. Our small and seemingly insignificant acts of obedience are remembered and rewarded by God though they are weak, flawed, and imperfect.

G. The Lord is longsuffering: He bears long with us instead of “writing us off.” God suffers long with our sinful responses to Him. He does not lose enthusiasm for us when we fail. His love for us is greater than the sadness we cause Him in the times when we intentionally resist Him.

>4Do you despise the riches of His goodness, forbearance, and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads you to repentance? (Rom. 2:4)

H. The Lord is abounding in goodness: He overflows with good plans for us. The song that is recorded most often in Scripture is “The Lord is good, His mercy endures forever” (1 Chr. 16:34, 41; 2 Chr. 5:13; 7:3, 6; 20:21; Ezra 3:11; Jer. 33:11). God will not withhold His best from us in relationships, ministry assignments, finances (Ps. 84:11).

I. Whose name is Jealous: God has emotion to protect His people and His relationship with them.

J. God proclaiming God’s name: Jesus referred to Moses’ experience when promising to declare God’s name or personality to awaken love in us. Paul also referred to this experience in Moses’ life (2 Cor. 3). The “beholding and becoming” principle teaches us that whatever emotions we behold (by study and meditation) about God’s heart for us are imparted to our heart for God. When God wants to empower us to love Him, He reveals Himself as the One who loves us.

>26I [Jesus] have declared to them Your name, and will declare it, that the love with which You loved Me may be in them… (Jn. 17:26)

>18Beholding…the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image… (2 Cor. 3:18)
