
# Session #27 Intimacy with God: Victory in the Face of Betrayal (Pt. 1)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. REVIEW: THE END-TIME CHURCH IS TRANSFORMED IN CONTEXT TO BETRAYAL

A. The combination of an unprecedented outpouring of the Spirit with betrayal is part of the optimum environment for the Church to be transformed in order to relate as an unified international family of affection (Jn. 17:22-23). Multitudes in the end-time Church will be progressing toward mature love, while many will be overcome with offense that will lead them to betray other believers (Mt. 24:10).

>22“And the glory which You gave Me I have given them, that they may be one just as We are one: 23…that the world may know that You have sent Me…” (Jn. 17:22-23)

>10“And then many will be offended, will betray one another...12the love of many will grow cold… 14This gospel…will be preached in all the world…then the end will come.” (Mt. 24:10-14)

>16“You will be betrayed even by parents and brothers, relatives and friends…” (Lk. 21:16)

B. God's power will be openly manifest in an unprecedented measure in the final 3½ years of this age (Rev. 12:6, 10, 14). At that time one of Satan’s most destructive weapons will be accusation.

>6The woman fled into the wilderness…[for] one thousand two hundred and sixty days [3½ years]. 7…Michael and his angels fought with the dragon… 9The dragon…and his angels were cast out… 10Then I heard a loud voice…“Now salvation, strength…and the power of His Christ have come, for the accuser of our brethren, who accused them…day and night, has been cast down. 11And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, and they did not love their lives to the death. 12…Woe to the inhabitants of the earth and the sea! For the devil has come…having great wrath, because he knows that he has a short time.” (Rev 12:6-12)

>28“…I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh; your sons and your daughters shall prophesy… 30I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth: blood and fire and pillars of smoke. 31The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the coming of the great and awesome day of the LORD... 32and in Jerusalem there shall be deliverance… (Joel 2:28-32)

C. Jesus wanted them to know that some would be betrayed in being put out of their spiritual families (synagogues; 16:2). In context to betrayal, the Spirit will escort us into the beauty of Jesus (16:13).

>26When the Helper [the Spirit] comes…He will testify of Me [reveal more of Me]. 27And you will bear witness… 16:2They will put you out of the synagogues [betrayal]… ” (Jn. 15:26-16:2)

>13The Spirit of truth…will guide [escort] you into all truth…14He will glorify Me, for He will take of what is Mine and declare it to you. (Jn. 16:13-14)

D. Those relating in godly ways contend for the destiny, honor, and family blessings of others. Hundreds of millions will respond to betrayal in a godly way resulting in the supernatural end-time unity of the Church. What Satan means for evil, the Lord uses for good (Gen. 50:20)

>44I say to you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you… 45that you may be sons of your Father…for He makes His sun rise on the evil… (Mt. 5:44-45)
