
# Session #28 Intimacy with God: Victory in the Face of Betrayal (Pt. 2)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. REVIEW: THE END-TIME CHURCH IS TRANSFORMED IN CONTEXT TO BETRAYAL

A. The combination of an unprecedented outpouring of the Spirit with betrayal is part of the optimum environment for the Church to be transformed in order to relate as an unified international family of affection (Jn. 17:22-23). Multitudes in the end-time Church will be progressing toward mature love, while many will be overcome with offense that will lead them to betray other believers (Mt. 24:10).

>22“And the glory which You gave Me I have given them, that they may be one just as We are one: 23…that the world may know that You have sent Me…” (Jn. 17:22-23)

>10“And then many will be offended, will betray one another...12the love of many will grow cold… 14This gospel…will be preached in all the world…then the end will come.” (Mt. 24:10-14)

>16“You will be betrayed even by parents and brothers, relatives and friends…” (Lk. 21:16)

B. Betrayal creates greater urgency in us to go much deeper in our relationship with God in our desire to find understanding, reconciliation, healing, and peace for the pain that is caused by betrayal. What Satan means for evil, the Lord uses for good (Gen. 50:20)

C. Betrayal is an “accelerant” that leads to faster growth in humble love or in bitterness and offense.

D. God's power will be openly manifest in an unprecedented measure in the final 3½ years of this age (Rev. 12:6, 10, 14). At that time one of Satan’s most destructive weapons will be accusation.

>6The woman fled into the wilderness…[for] one thousand two hundred and sixty days [3½ years]. 7…Michael and his angels fought with the dragon… 9The dragon…and his angels were cast out… 10Then I heard a loud voice…“Now salvation, strength…and the power of His Christ have come, for the accuser of our brethren, who accused them…day and night, has been cast down. 11And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, and they did not love their lives to the death. 12…Woe to the inhabitants of the earth and the sea! For the devil has come…having great wrath, because he knows that he has a short time.” (Rev 12:6-12)

>28“…I will pour out My Spirit on all flesh; your sons and your daughters shall prophesy… 30I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth: blood and fire and pillars of smoke. 31The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the coming of the great and awesome day of the LORD... 32and in Jerusalem there shall be deliverance… (Joel 2:28-32)

E. Jesus wanted them to know that some would be betrayed in being put out of their spiritual families (synagogues; 16:2). In context to betrayal, the Spirit will escort us into the beauty of Jesus (16:13) . He will teach us to understand and align ourselves to Jesus’ heart, leadership, and eternal values.

>26When the Helper [the Spirit] comes…He will testify of Me [reveal more of Me]. 27And you will bear witness… 16:1These things I have spoken to you, that you should not be made to stumble [be overcome by offense]. 2They will put you out of the synagogues [betrayal]… ” (Jn. 15:26-16:2)

>13The Spirit of truth…will guide [escort] you into all truth…14He will glorify Me, for He will take of what is Mine and declare it to you. (Jn. 16:13-14)

F. Our greatest danger is not in being betrayed but in responding to it in a wrong way, leading to our spiritual failure and falling short of the grace of God (Heb. 12:14-15).

>14Pursue peace with all people…15looking carefully lest anyone fall short of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness [offense] springing up cause trouble, and by this many become defiled. (Heb. 12:14-15)

G. I have often witnessed the offense-betrayal cycle that results in an increase of broken relationships. An offended person is vulnerable to betray the one who offended them. Then the betrayed believer becomes vulnerable to be offended and then betray the one who initially betrayed them, etc.

H. The promise of the seal of divine love in Song 8:6 includes the Lord giving the worldwide body of Christ grace to love even the offended ones who betray us—“love as strong as death”(Song 8:6). Specifically, this love is love for the Bridegroom King who loves us and those who betray us. The “oil of intimacy” is cultivated best in the fires of persecution including being betrayed.

>6Set Me as a seal upon your heart…for love is as strong as death… (Song 8:6)

I. Those relating in godly ways contend for the destiny, honor, and family blessings of others. Hundreds of millions will respond to betrayal in a godly way resulting in the supernatural end-time unity of the Church. What Satan means for evil, the Lord uses for good (Gen. 50:20)

>44I say to you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you… 45that you may be sons of your Father…for He makes His sun rise on the evil… (Mt. 5:44-45)
