
# Session #3 The Greatest Personal Prayer Request

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

# I. REVIEW OF SESSION #2

A. Jesus spoke of some called “great” and some called “least” in the kingdom. God will call their life choices “great” because they loved and obeyed Him.

>19Whoever breaks [consistently] one of the least of these commandments, and teaches men so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever does [consistently] and teaches them, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. (Mt. 5:19)

B. John 13-17 is the greatest teaching given by the greatest teacher! It was given at the Last Supper.

C. Two days earlier on Tuesday, Jesus defined loving God as the “first” and “great” commandment (Mt. 22:38), thus identifying it as the Spirit’s first priority in the kingdom, the “first” calling for our life, the promise we pray for “most,” and the most reliable definition of a “great” life.

>37You shall love the LORD… 38This is the first and great commandment. (Mt. 22:37-38)

## II. JESUS URGED THEM TO ASK FOR ANYTHING IN GOD'S WILL

A. Jesus connected His promise to answer prayer in 14:14 to the Spirit empowering them to love Him in 14:15-16. It takes the power of God to love God with all our heart. The Spirit’s greatest work is to empower people to love Jesus. God is glorified most as people walk in obedient love for Jesus.

>14If you ask anything in My name, I will do it. 15If you love Me, keep My commandments… 16the Father…will give you another Helper… 17the Spirit of truth… (Jn. 14:14-17)

B. When Jesus said to “ask anything” (14:14), He immediately focused them on the grace to love Him (14:15). The ultimate “anything” we can ask for is the grace to walk out the first commandment.

C. We are to pray with faith for the Spirit to “impart the Father’s love for Jesus in our heart” (17:26).

>26“…that the love with which You [the Father] loved Me may be in them…” (Jn. 17:26)

D. Two days earlier on Tuesday, Jesus emphasized this glorious promise to ask for “whatever” (Mk. 11:24)—this is similar to what He said to Solomon (2 Chr. 1:7-12).

>24…whatever things you ask…believe that you receive them, and you will have them. (Mk. 11:24)

>7…God appeared to Solomon [in a dream] and said to him, “Ask! What shall I give you?”… 10“Give me wisdom and knowledge…” 11God said to Solomon: “Because this was in your heart, and you have not asked riches…or honor…nor…long life…12[Therefore] wisdom and knowledge are granted to you; and I will give you riches, wealth and honor…” (2 Chr. 1:7-12)

E. The call to love God is the point that Jesus emphasized most in John 13-17. Jesus linked loving God with obeying God five times in John 14 (see 14:15, 21, 23, 24, 31).

>15If you love Me, keep My commandments...21He who…keeps them, it is he who loves Me… 23If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word…24He who does not love Me does not keep My words…31I love the Father, and as the Father gave Me commandment, so I do. (Jn. 14:15-31)

F. Jesus defined loving God as being deeply rooted in a spirit of obedience. He calls us to love God on God’s terms or by His definition of love. He is the most qualified to define love (1 Jn. 4:16). There is no such thing as loving God without seeking to obey Him. The distorted grace message promotes sentimental definitions of love that minimize obedience to Jesus—it is a deception. Jesus never apologized for calling His people to holiness as if it was “negative.” He contends for our greatness.

G. Serving Jesus faithfully and denying our lustful desires are “the theater” that God chose for us to express our love to Him. Jesus takes this personally. Some think of lust as only about immorality, but lust includes covetousness, anger, bitterness, retaliation, complaining, slander, and more.

H. Each of us has a different struggle according to our own personality and life circumstances. Thus, we each have a different “assignment,” from which we offer our gift of obedient love to God. Our love (and resistance of sinful lusts) is often weak and flawed, but it is still valued and honored by the Lord. Weak love is still real love—it is genuine. Our love is not only real when it is mature.

I. Affection-based obedience is the most reliable—compared to duty-based or fear-based obedience. The King in Song of Solomon described His Bride’s heart of loyal love as a “locked garden” (4:12).

>12A garden locked is My sister, My bride, a spring locked, a fountain sealed. (Song 4:12; ESV)
