
# Session #30—My Journey: Committing to Respond like David When Betrayed

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. REVIEW: THE END-TIME CHURCH IS TRANSFORMED IN CONTEXT TO BETRAYAL

A. The combination of an unprecedented outpouring of the Spirit with betrayal is part of the optimum environment for the Church to be transformed in order to relate as an unified international family of affection (Jn. 17:22-23). Multitudes in the end-time Church will be progressing toward mature love, while many will be overcome with offense that will lead them to betray other believers (Mt. 24:10).

B. Betrayal creates greater urgency in us to go much deeper in our relationship with God in our desire to find understanding, reconciliation, healing, and peace for the pain that is caused by betrayal.

C. Betrayal is an “accelerant” that leads to faster growth in humble love or in bitterness and offense.

D. Through the life of David, scripture gives far more info about how to respond to God when betrayed by those in close relationship than it gives through any other. He is a witness or model (Isa. 55:4) of how to respond to God so as to be equipped to a be leader “after God’s heart” (Acts 13:22).

>4I have given him [David] as a witness [model] to the people, a leader… (Isa. 55:4)

>22“…He raised up for them David as king, to whom also He gave testimony and said, ‘I have found David…a man after My own heart, who will do all My will.’” (Acts 13:22)

>15I will give you shepherds according to My heart, who will feed you with knowledge… (Jer. 3:15)

E. God trained him in the “seminary of the Spirit” using a jealous king and others who betrayed him. David was betrayed many times yet showed kindness because he looked to God to vindicate him in His own way and timing. He invoked God’s intervention saying, “let God decide” (1 Sam. 24:15), knowing that in God’s timing, he would be vindicated without David taking matters into his hands.

>15“Let the LORD be judge, and [decide; NAS] between you [King Saul] and me…” (1 Sam. 24:15)

## II. MY JOURNEY IN COMMITTING TO RESPOND LIKE DAVID TO BETRAYAL

A. My journey in the “seminary of the Spirit’s training” related to betrayal began in my first prophetic encounter as a pastor (Dec. 19, 1976), when the Lord told me that in the future I would be opposed by many but my “greatness” would be related to receiving God’s gentleness and responding to my adversaries in gentleness and in growing in the ability to impart this to others (Ps. 18:35; Mt. 5:44).

>35…Your right hand has held me up. Your gentleness has made me great. (Ps 18:35)

B. The Lord is leading His people into a John 17:22-23 transformation by embracing and imparting Matthew 5:44—to be like our Father (5:45). Embracing this ushers us into a supernatural lifestyle as we love those who betray us. (Jesus was not here addressing self-defense against physical harm).

>44I say to you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you… 45that you may be sons of your Father…for He makes His sun rise on the evil… (Mt. 5:44-45)

>18Who is a God like You, pardoning iniquity…because He delights in mercy. (Mic. 7:18)

C. Three messages related to betrayal and my prophetic encounter with the Black Horse in 1984.  
Link to Mike’s message “Embracing God’s Narrative When Mistreated” (My Black Horse encounter) (Sept. 13, 2020)  
https://mikebickle.org/resource/mature-love-embracing-gods-narrative-when-mistreated/  
See Link to Mike’s message “The Blueprint Prophecy and the Black Horse” (Sept. 14, 2019)  
https://mikebickle.org/resource/the-blueprint-prophecy-and-the-black-horse/  
See Link to “The Black Horse: Zechariah 3-4 unto Isaiah 19 and John 17” (Aug. 30, 2020)  
https://mikebickle.org/resource/the-black-horse-zechariah-3-4-unto-isaiah-19-and-john-17/

D. In July 1988: God spoke audibly of releasing grace to walk in Song 8:6. The promise of the seal of divine love in Song 8:6 includes the Lord giving the body of Christ grace to love even the offended ones who betray us. This is love for the Bridegroom King who loves us and those who betray us.

>6Set Me as a seal upon your heart…for love is as strong as death… (Song 8:6)

E. This includes entering into the reality of Song 4:9. We are to express God’s heart for others (not just to enjoy God's love and ravished heart for us).

>9You have ravished my heart…with one look of your eyes… (Song 4:9)

## III. GOD WANTS US TO HAVE COMPASSION ON THOSE WHO BETRAY US

A. God wants us to have compassion on those who betray us, knowing plight of a betrayer is very hard.

1. People who betray others suffer in ways that they did not anticipate (1 Pet. 4:15; Jas. 3:15).

2. Satan stirred Judas to betray Jesus (Jn. 13:2). He was unable to get free from the dark dynamics of despair and hopelessness that resulted from opening the door to demons by his choices—he hung himself.

B. Jesus felt anguish about Judas’s betrayal (Jn. 13:21) not because He felt rejected by it. Jesus had anguish over the fate of a man whom He loved but who refused His kindness and delight in mercy.

>21Jesus…was troubled in spirit, and testified and said, “…one of you will betray Me.” (Jn. 13:21)

C. The apostolic team was hurt by Judas’ betrayal, which in essence also betrayed them. Those who betray often do not consider the pain that others will suffer as a consequence of their betrayal.

D. The apostles saw how to respond to betrayal by watching how He responded (Mt. 26:50; Lk. 23:34).

>49…[Judas]…kissed Him. 50Jesus said, “Friend, why have you come?” (Mt. 26:49-50)

>23While being reviled, He [Jesus] did not revile in return; while suffering, He uttered no threats, but kept entrusting Himself to Him who judges righteously. (1 Pet. 2:23; NASB)

E. Jesus knew Judas would betray Him when He chose him (Jn. 6:64-71). God allows those who will betray to get into the inner circle of a leadership team in order to train and transform His servants.

>64Jesus knew from the beginning…who would betray Him … 70Jesus answered them, “Did I not choose you…one of you is a devil?” 71He spoke of Judas…who would betray Him. (Jn. 6:64-71)
