
# Session #4 The Power of Affection Based Obedience

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. INTRODUCTION

A. Affection-based obedience is the most reliable—compared to duty-based or fear-based obedience.

B. John 13-17 is the greatest teaching given by the greatest teacher! It was given at the Last Supper.

C. The call to love God is the point that Jesus emphasized most in John 13-17. Jesus linked loving God with obeying God five times in John 14 (see 14:15, 21, 23, 24, 31).

>15If you love Me, keep My commandments...21He who…keeps them, it is he who loves Me… 23If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word…24He who does not love Me does not keep My words…31I love the Father, and as the Father gave Me commandment, so I do. (Jn. 14:15-31)

D. Jesus defined loving God as being deeply rooted in a spirit of obedience. He calls us to love God on God’s terms or by His definition of love. He is the most qualified to define love (1 Jn. 4:16). There is no such thing as loving God without seeking to obey Him. The distorted grace message promotes sentimental definitions of love that minimize obedience to Jesus—it is a deception. Jesus never apologized for calling His people to holiness as if it was “negative.” He contends for our greatness.

E. Serving Jesus faithfully and denying our lustful desires are “the theater” that God chose for us to express our love to Him. Jesus takes this personally. Some think of lust as only about immorality, but lust includes covetousness, anger, bitterness, retaliation, complaining, slander, and more.

F. Each of us has a different struggle according to our own personality and life circumstances. Thus, we each have a different “assignment,” from which we offer our gift of obedient love to God. Our love (and resistance of sinful lusts) is often weak and flawed, but it is still valued and honored by the Lord. Weak love is still real love—it is genuine. Our love is not only real when it is mature.

G. Affection-based obedience is the most reliable—compared to duty-based or fear-based obedience. The King in Song of Solomon described His Bride’s heart of loyal love as a “locked garden” (4:12).

>12A garden locked is My sister, My bride, a spring locked, a fountain sealed. (Song 4:12; ESV)
