
#Session #5 Jesus’ Greatest and Most Exhilarating Promise

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. THE GLORY AND IMPORTANCE OF OBEDIENT LOVE FOR JESUS

A. The call to a lifestyle that loves God is the point that Jesus emphasized most in John 13-17. Jesus linked loving God with obeying God five times in John 14 (see 14:15, 21, 23, 24, 31).

>15If you love Me, keep My commandments...21He who…keeps them, it is he who loves Me… 23If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word…24He who does not love Me does not keep My words…31I love the Father, and as the Father gave Me commandment, so I do. (Jn. 14:15-31)

B. In John 14:21, Jesus repeated what He said in connecting love to obedience in 14:15, then He added two promises—that He and the Father will love them and Jesus will manifest Himself to them.

>21“He who has My commandments and keeps them, it is he who loves Me. And he who loves Me will be loved by My Father, and I will love him and manifest Myself to him.” (Jn. 14:21)

C. Jesus said that He would manifest Himself to those who love Him—this includes them enjoying the “conscious presence of God” on their mind and heart on a regular basis. This is a glorious promise.

D. Jesus said that “the Father loves” or enjoys the life choices of all who love Jesus (14:21, 23; 16:27). He was referring to a very specific blessing—that some are loved by the Father “because of” their extravagant response to love and obey Jesus.

>23If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word; and My Father will love him… (Jn. 14:23)

>27…for the Father Himself loves you, because you have loved Me… (Jn. 16:27)

E. The idea of the Father loving us “because” we love and obey Jesus confuses some because it appears to be a contradiction to the truth that we love God because He first loved us (1 Jn. 4:19).

>19We love Him because He first loved us. (1 Jn. 4:19)

F. Jesus spoke of two distinct expressions of God’s love for His people:

1. God so loves the world in fullness (Jn. 3:16). The Father loves all people in the world redemptively in the sense of valuing, caring for, and pursuing them. God so loved the world with His infinite and everlasting love—He proved it by sending His Son to die for us. His love for all the people in the world is not caused or motivated by their response to Jesus.

2. He loves or enjoys His relationship with those who obey Him. The Father enjoys and esteems the life choices and fruit of those who obey Jesus. He enjoys His relationship with them and delights in His conversing and working “with them” in partnership (Mk. 16:20).

>17“…My Father loves Me, because I lay down My life that I may take it again.” (Jn. 10:17)

3. “The Father loving or enjoying one's life choices” is another way of describing “friendship with God” in Jn 15:15—I consider these as the greatest reward that we can receive from God.

G. A good father loves all of his children—both the rebellious and obedient ones.

1. He continues to love the child who resists him but he must exercise great patience as he relates to that child who regularly complains and argues with him causing him and the family much grief and pain.

2. That father’s relationship is delightful with the obedient child who has the same goals and values and who longs to work closely with him. That father does not love the obedient child more but he deeply enjoys his relationship and conversations with that child.

H. One might ask how can God really enjoy His relationship and conversation with them since much of their time is spent in routine work and the necessary daily tasks that are not “spiritual” activities.

1. Part of the answer is found in whispering “20 second phrases” of affection, gratitude, and prayers for help throughout the day. Prayers for help include asking for direction, protection, provision, and grace to impact others.

2. The routine work and daily tasks of life are not in themselves sacred but the time that we do our work becomes “sacred” as we engage in short conversation with God as we do our work and tasks. I recommend the book “Practice the Presence of God” by Brother Lawrence.

I. Jesus did not apologize for calling people to whole heartedness. Today, many ministries will avoid the call to radical obedience and to zealously seek the Lord in the Word and prayer

J. In Scripture there is various terminology for walking in mature love and deep intimacy with God

1. Jesus said, the Father loves or enjoys one's life choices and conversations (14:21, 23; 16:27).

2. Jesus spoke of His people living as “friend of God” (Jn. 15:15).

3. One’s life choices being “called great” by God (Mt. 5:19).

4. Paul referred to his highest ambition to be “well pleasing to God” (2 Cor. 5:9).

5. Paul spoke of pressing toward the goal for “the prize” of the upward call of God (Phil. 3:14). As the premier teacher on grace, Paul exhorted believers to press into God for “the prize.”

>12…I press on, that I may lay hold of that for which Christ…laid hold of me [the fullness of my destiny]… 14I press toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God… (Phil. 3:12-14)

K. The call to be a loved by the Father or to be a friend of God creates the tension that Jesus referred to when He said, “Blessed are they that mourn”). This mourning refers to the pain that we feel when we see “the gap” between what God has made available to us and what we are experiencing. We mourn when seeing how little we experience as compared to how much is available. This mourning includes the pain we feel over our failure to follow through in seeking Jesus in a wholehearted way.

>4Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. (Mt 5:4)

L. Mourning and joy: We hold these two truths in tension. We rejoice in who we are in Christ and what we are experiencing in God, while we are aware of how much more there is to experience. We are grateful for all that we experience, but continually seek the Lord for a greater measure.
