
# Session #6 The Superior Pleasure of Obedient Love

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. THE KINGDOM VIEW OF OBEDIENCE: THE SUPERIOR PLEASURES OF THE GOSPEL

A. It is essential to cultivate a kingdom view of obedience. The enemy works to obscure this reality.

B. David prayed that the Lord give His people drink from the river of His pleasure (Ps. 36:8). The greatest pleasures available to the human spirit are the spiritual pleasures that come to us as God reveals God to us—when God the Spirit reveals the Father and Son to His people (Jn. 16:14) .

>8…and You give them drink from the river of Your pleasures. (Ps. 36:8)

>14He [the Spirit] will glorify Me, for He will take of what is Mine and declare it to you. (Jn. 16:14)

C. We are freed from the inferior pleasures of sin by experiencing the superior pleasures of the gospel. When we feel the superior pleasurers of the gospel (even a little), we are liberated from the dominion of dark emotions related to the inferior pleasures of sin.

D. It takes spiritual understanding to see obedience as the way to true liberty, greatness, and joy.

>9…Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for those who love Him.” 10God has revealed them to us through His Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God… 12Now we have received… the Spirit…that we might know the things that have been freely given to us by God. (1 Cor 2:9-12)

E. Many see obedience or holiness as the drudgery of self-denial. Holiness is almost a bad word today. The truth is that holiness is the most pleasurable quality of life in existence. It is how God lives.

F. Happy holiness: We can live fascinated with joy in the pleasure of loving God that overflows in loving people. David prayed to know and see “the path of life” that pleased God (Ps. 16:11).

>11You will show me the path of life; in Your presence is fullness of joy; at Your right hand are pleasures forevermore. (Ps. 16:11)

1. Holiness equips us to enjoy life with God–it does not keep us from spiritual pleasure.

2. Holiness sets us free from vain imaginations and the dullness of lust and bitterness.

G. Holiness is not just a good idea for the distant future. It is possible to live with a holy preoccupation with the beauty of Jesus today. The battle for holiness is the battle to become fascinated with Jesus.

>4Delight yourself also in the LORD, and He shall give you the desires of your heart. (Ps. 37:4)

H. John Piper said, God is most glorified in us when we are most satisfied in him. My passion is to assert the supremacy of God in every area of life. My discovery is that God is supreme not where He is simply served with duty but where he is savored with delight. To delight yourself in the Lord is our primary way forward…to the praise of his glory."

I. Jesus never apologized for calling His people to obedience or holiness as if it was “negative.” His commands are not burdensome but are designed to lead us to joy, liberty, and greatness.

>2By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep His commandments. 3This is the love of God, that we keep His commandments. His commandments are not burdensome. (1 Jn. 5:2-3)

1. John exposed Satan’s lie that God’s commandments were burdensome.

2. John did not allow a false dichotomy of choosing between loving people and loving and obeying God (1 Jn. 5:2-3). The litmus test of our genuine love for people from God’s point of view is that we love and obey God.

J. The enemy promotes the lie that seeking to obey the Lord in a wholehearted way is burdensome–that it is even a harmful type of legalism. This lie is manifested in validating sinful choices with the rhetoric of “grace”—yet God is raising up those who will contend for the true gospel (Jude 3-4).

>3…exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered to the saints. 4Certain men have crept in unnoticed…who turn the grace of our God into lewdness. (Jude 3-4)

K. Paul exposed the error of various leaders in the Church who taught that “liberty in the grace” was liberty to indulge their flesh in immorality, drunkenness, etc. He exhorted them to reject distorted teaching about liberty and see that the Spirit seeks to liberate their mind and emotions so that they might walk free from fear, accusation, addictions, and other dark emotions (2 Cor. 3:17-18).

>13You…have been called to liberty; do not use liberty as an opportunity for the flesh… (Gal. 5:13)

>17…where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. 18But we all…beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from glory to glory… (2 Cor. 3:17-18)

L. Obedience to Jesus is the only reliable pathway to true spiritually, emotional rest, and lasting joy. Being yoked to obey Jesus’ leadership is the place we find emotional rest from the weariness of “option fatigue,” and the fear of missing out, perpetually guessing what will make us happiest.

>29“Take My yoke upon you…find rest for your souls. 30My yoke is easy…” (Mt. 11:29-30)

1. No one puts on a yoke to rest physically. Jesus promised spiritual and emotional rest to those who surrender themselves to His truth and loving leadership.

2. Jesus’ yoke is easy because of His loving leadership. The yoke of self or sin is hard to bear; its penalties are severe. God’s truths and commands are the “user manual” for our hearts.

M. Obedience to Jesus is the only reliable pathway to true greatness. He calls one’s life choices “great” as they love and obey Him. This is attained without regard for outward achievements and impact. It is based on the size of one’s heart response to Him. We are not left guessing what He calls great.

>19Whoever breaks [consistently] one of the least of these commandments, and teaches men so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever does [consistently] and teaches them, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. (Mt. 5:19)
