
# Session #7 The Glory of Being Chosen By Jesus (Jn. 15:16)

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. GOD CHOSE HIS PEOPLE FOR FRIENDSHIP AND FRUITFULNESS (JN. 15:16)

A. Immediately after speaking on friendship with God, Jesus assured them that it was not their idea but a privilege that began in God’s heart that He will help them to grow in until they reach its fullness.

>15“…I have called you friends…16You did not choose Me, but I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain [be rewarded in eternity], that whatever you ask the Father in My name He may give you. (Jn. 15:15-16)

B. I chose you and appointed you: This divine choosing is for every believer. Jesus wanted them to be clear that He took the initiative in their relationship with Him (Jn. 1:39, 42-43; 6:70). This is important because of the fear that they were about to face that night (14:1), and because Peter and the others trusted their commitment to Jesus more than His commitment to them (Mt. 26:33-35).

>33Peter [said], “Even if all are made to stumble because of You, I will never be made to stumble”… 35if I have to die with You, I will not deny You!” And so said all the disciples. (Mt. 26:33-35)

C. I chose you: Our relationship with Jesus was initiated by Him. By saying, “I chose you,” He assures us that He is yoked or bonded to us. He seeks to convince us—it is not us convincing Him—of a friendship that bears much fruit that glorifies God and remains (Jn. 15:8, 16). He laid His claim on us before we ever thought of Him. Thus, He is committed to uphold, oversee, undergird and be the strength in our relationship with Him. I pray, “Jesus, thank You that You chose me. Show me more!”

1. By declaring that He chose us, Jesus takes full responsibility to help us to grow strong in our relationship to Him by giving us direction, provision, protection, and vindication so that we are able to bear fruit that glorifies the Father. We must talk much to Him about this as we ask for help (15:16d). We are assured that He will hear our prayers for help to bear much fruit.

2. He is more committed to seeing our relationship with Him grow than we are. His plan for our life is bigger and better than our plan for our life. We can be sure that He is with us when we face troubles. He will lead us in a way to bear good fruit even in the face of hostility (15:18).

3. Peter elaborated on 15:16, declaring that Jesus chose us as His special people (1 Pet. 2:9). We are a special treasure to Him (Ex. 19:5; Deut. 7:6; 14:2; Ps. 135:4; Mal. 3:17; 1 Pet. 2:9).

>9But you are a chosen generation [people]…His own special people, that you may proclaim [give witness to] the praises of Him who called you…into His marvelous light… (1 Pet. 2:9)

4. He chose us: This is also applies to how He chose to form our inward parts in our mother’s womb in a unique way with various strengths and weaknesses (Ps. 139:13-16).

>13You formed my inward parts; You covered me in my mother’s womb. 14I will praise You, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made… 15My frame was not hidden from You, when I was made in secret…16Your eyes saw my substance, being yet unformed. And in Your book they all were written, the days fashioned for me, when as yet there were none of them. (Ps. 139:13-16)

D. Did Jesus chose us or did we chose Him? Both, but this must be understood in the right sequence.

1. First, Jesus chose to reveal the Father to us long before we wanted to know Him (Mt.11:27). The reason we know the invisible God of Genesis 1 is because Jesus inspired us to seek Him.

>27Nor does anyone know the Father except…the one whom to the Son wills to reveal Him. (Mt. 11:27)

2. His choices come from His infinite wisdom and perfect foreknowledge (Ps. 139:4; Jer. 1:5; Rom. 8:29; 1 Pet. 1:1-2). To be conformed to the image of Jesus is synonymous with bearing much fruit that remains. “He knew what He was getting into when He called your name.”

>28…all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are the called… 29For whom He foreknew, He predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son… (Rom. 8:28-29)

>1Peter…to the pilgrims…. 2elect according to the foreknowledge of God… (1 Pet. 1:1-2) 

3. Second, we must respond to His choosing of us by choosing to love Him on His terms. They had to choose to follow Him in a wholehearted way in order to bear fruit (Lk. 14:26-33).

## II. WEAK PEOPLE ARE CHOSEN TO BEAR FRUIT THAT REMAINS

A. Jesus calls, ordains, and qualifies weak people in His own way and timing (1 Cor. 1:26-29). Throughout history, God has called many to serve in areas where they had no previous experience.

>26For you see your calling, brethren, that not many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called. 27…God has chosen the weak things of the world to put to shame the things which are mighty…29that no flesh should glory in His presence. (1 Cor. 1:26-29)

1. The apostles were uneducated fishermen (Acts 4:13). Yet, they were the most effective spiritual leaders in the first century. This is the result of Jesus having chosen them.

>13When they saw the boldness of Peter and John and perceived that they were uneducated and untrained men, they marveled. And they realized that they had been with Jesus. (Acts 4:13)

2. Paul’s appearance and speaking was unimpressive (2 Cor 10:10; 11:16).

>10“For his letters,” they say, “are weighty…but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible.” (2 Cor. 10:10)

3. Consider Moses (Ex. 4), Jeremiah (Jer. 1), Gideon (Judg. 6), and Joshua (Zech. 3:3).

>10Moses said…, “O my Lord, I am not eloquent…I am slow of speech and slow of tongue.” 11The LORD said…, “Who has made man’s mouth?...12Now go, I will…teach you what you shall say.” 13But he said, “…please send by the hand of whomever else…” (Ex. 4:10-13)

>5“Before I formed you in the womb I knew you; before you were born…I ordained you a prophet…” 6Then said I: “Ah, Lord GOD! Behold, I cannot speak, for I am a youth.” 7The LORD said to me: “Do not say, ‘I am a youth,’ for you shall go to all to whom I send you. (Jer. 1:5-7)
