
# Session #9 My Two Favorite Verses & Prayers

>“The friend of the Bridegroom…rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom’s voice.” (Jn. 3:29)

## I. TWO VERSES THAT CHANGED MY LIFE THE MOST—JOHN 15:9 & 17:26

A. My favorite way to start my prayer times is by praying according to John 15:9 and John 17:26. These two verses set us on the trajectory of being transformed by God's love

>26And I [Jesus] have declared [revealed] to them Your name [glory], and will declare it, that the love with which You [the Father] loved Me may be in them…” (Jn. 17:26)

>9“As the Father loved Me, I also have loved you; abide [stay engaged] in My love.” (Jn. 15:9)

B. In John 15:9, Jesus declared the two most important truths in the Bible (that the Father loves Jesus; and that Jesus loves His people with the same intensity); then He gave the most important command (to abide or to stay focused on and engaged in conversation with God related to these two truths).

1. Truth #1: The Father’s love for Jesus (15:9a) points us to the reality of how God loves God. We best understand love by seeing it in it larger context of how God loves God.

2. Truth #2: Jesus loves His people (15:9b) in the same intensity that the Father loves Him.

3. The command: To abide or live focused on understanding and expressing God’s love (15:9c). Jesus called us to abide or live in an on-going conversation with God around these two truths.

C. God's kingdom is secure forever because of 15:9ab; our personal lives are strong as we obey 15:9c.

D. The way God loves God (15:9a) is the greatest love story—it overflows to His people (15:9b). This is the narrative that we can “daydream” about by asking the Spirit to give us whispers from the Scripture of what He sees and feels about this glorious, divine, eternal narrative (Col. 3:1-2).

E. I enjoy starting my prayer times by praying according to John 15:9 and John 17:26. I intermittently pray in the Spirit while praying through these two Bible verses.

1. I often start with John 15:9 praying, “Thank you, Father, for the way You love Jesus and the Holy Spirit. Show me more details! Holy Spirit, let me see what You see and feel what You feel about how the Father loves Jesus and the love You share with the Father and the Son.”

>9“As the Father loved Me…” (Jn. 15:9a)

2. I pray, “Thank you, Jesus, for the way You love me and Your people (Jn. 15:9b). Show me more! Holy Spirit, let me see what You see and feel what You feel about the love that Jesus has for me and for others.”

>9“…I also have loved you…” (Jn. 15:9b)

3. I pray, “I commit to abide in Your love (Jn. 15:9c), help me more!”

>9“…abide [stay engaged] in My love.” (Jn. 15:9c)

F. Next, I pray through John 17:26 which highlights Jesus’ promise to reveal the Father’s name (glory) to us and Jesus’ prayer that the Father’s love for Him be imparted in us.

1. I pray, “Thank you, Jesus for revealing the Father to me (Jn. 17:26a). Show me more details! Holy Spirit, let me see what Jesus’ sees and feel about the Father.”

>26“I [Jesus] have declared to them Your name [glory], and will declare it…” (Jn. 17:26a)

2. I pray, “Thank you, Father, for the way You love Jesus, impart it in me (Jn. 15:9b).

>26“…that the love with which You [the Father] loved Me may be in them…” (Jn. 17:26b)

G. Hosea taught that returning to the Lord includes bringing words to speak to Him (Hos. 14:1-3).

>1O Israel, return to the LORD… 2Take words with you, and return to the LORD. (Hos. 14:1-2)

H. Our words are in His heart, and His words are in our heart—this is foundational to our union (15:7). It starts with words—the Christian life is an ongoing dialogue with a Person. Simple phrases spoken to God can shift our emotions.

I. In Deuteronomy 30, Moses taught that the command to love and obey God was not too mysterious (too hard to understand), nor was it far off (outside their ability), nor did they need to ascend to heaven (have a heavenly encounter), nor go overseas (to receive it at a revival center) to do it. His point is that the power to love God is so near us—in our mouths (30:14)—by speaking to God.

>6The LORD your God will circumcise your heart…to love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul... 11This commandment…is not too mysterious for you, nor is it far off. 12It is not in heaven, that you should say, “Who will ascend into heaven for us and bring it to us…?” 13Nor is it beyond the sea, that you should say, “Who will go over the sea…and bring it to us…?” 14The word is very near you, in your mouth and in your heart, that you may do it. (Deut. 30:11-14)

J. It is a common error to try to live the Christian life without Christ—without conversation with Him. We cease from striving to love God and people by continually returning to conversation with Jesus which empowers us to love instead of striving in our human strength to love by our own efforts.
