
# Session 12 The Forerunner Message in Psalms 93 and 94 

## I. INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 93

A. This is an enthronement psalm celebrating the Lord’s reign on the earth similar to Psalms 95-99. The ultimate fulfillment of these psalms will occur in context to Jesus’ reign in the Millennium. 

B. Enthronement psalms are not the same as royal psalms. In the enthronement psalms, the focus is on the Lord as King, while royal psalms highlighted the actions related to Israel’s earthly kings. 

C. There is no mention of the context or author of Psalm 93. 

D. Outline of Psalm 93  
93:1-2	The Lord’s sovereign power and majesty  
93:3-4	The Lord has power over all the floods of this world  
93:5	The supremacy and power of God’s Word

## II. THE LORD’S SOVEREIGN POWER AND MAJESTY (PS. 93:1-2)

A. The psalmist declared that the Lord reigns with majesty and strength (93:1-2).

>1The Lord reigns, He is clothed with majesty…He has girded Himself with strength. Surely the world is established, so that it cannot be moved [shaken]. 2Your throne is established from of old; You are from everlasting. (Ps. 93:1-2) 

B. The Lord reigns: He reigns now in heaven and will reign on earth when Jesus returns. Isaiah described the time when a runner will bring the report of victory to end-time Jerusalem, shouting, “Your God reigns” (Isa. 52:7). Seeing this truth will bring us peace in the end-time storms. 

C. He is clothed with majesty: The Lord clothing Himself with majesty includes the Lord openly showing those on the earth a display of His majesty. For Him to “gird Himself with strength” is comparable to a warrior who “girded himself” or put on the belt that carried his weapons before going to battle. To be girded with strength implied His readiness to rise up to enter the battle. The Lord is said to be clothed with power when He openly displays it in a special way and measure. 

D. The world is established so it cannot be moved: Some commentators see this as anticipating the establishment of Jesus’ millennial reign as God shakes the nations just before Jesus returns. The natural creation and the social structures of the nations will never be shaken again after He returns. 

>6“…I will shake heaven and earth, the sea and dry land; 7and I will shake all nations, and they [the nations] shall come to the Desire of All Nations [Jesus]…” (Hag. 2:6-7) 

>18…there was a great earthquake, such a mighty and great earthquake as had not occurred… 19and the cities of the nations fell…20Every island fled away, and the mountains were not found. 21And great hail…fell upon men, each hailstone about the weight of a talent. (Rev. 16:18-21) 

E. Your throne is established from of old: The Lord and His throne are from everlasting. 

## III. THE LORD HAS POWER OVER ALL THE FLOODS OF THIS WORLD (PS. 93:3-4)

A. God’s power is greater than that of “the floods” which move with irresistible force and great noise. 

>3The floods have lifted up, O Lord; the floods have lifted up their voice [and]…their waves. 4The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, than the mighty waves of the sea. (Ps. 93:3-4) 

B. The floods have lifted up: The floods in Scripture are often literal floods, but they can also refer to the “roaring” of hostile nations against God’s people or to God’s judgments against wicked nations (Isa. 8:7-8; 17:12-13; 28:2; 59:19; Rev. 12:15). The nations will be greatly shaken in the end time; this shaking can be compared to raging storms at sea with destructive waves with terrifying noises. 

>12Woe to the multitude of many people [nations] who make a noise like the roar of the seas, and to the rushing of nations that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters! 13The nations will rush like the rushing of many waters; but God will rebuke them… (Isa. 17:12-13)

>5The mountains quake before Him…the world and all who dwell in it. 6Who can stand before His indignation?…8With an overflowing flood He will make an utter end of its [Nineveh’s] place… (Nah. 1:5-8) 

>15So the serpent [Satan] spewed water out of his mouth like a flood after the woman [remnant of Israel], that he might cause her to be carried away by the flood. (Rev. 12:15) 

C. The Lord is mightier than the noise of many waters: The Lord is more powerful than any floods or thunderings or waves that will shake the nations or than the persecutions against His people.

## IV. THE SUPREMACY AND POWER OF GOD’S WORD (PS. 93:5) 

A. The message here addresses those concerned about the shaking of the nations and the persecution of God’s people. The psalmist gives assurance of the supremacy, power, and reliability of God’s Word and His works. God is mightier than the waves that shake nations; His might is especially shown in the power of His words even as they transform His house to sustain holiness forever.

>5Your testimonies [God’s Word] are very sure; holiness adorns Your house, O Lord, forever. (Ps. 93:5) 

B. Your testimonies are very sure:  God’s “testimonies” are His promises, commandments, and warnings that give witness to His heart and will. They are “very sure,” totally reliable and unalterable. The power and stability of His testimonies or words are foundational to His kingship.  

>7The law of the Lord is perfect…the testimony of the Lord is sure… (Ps. 19:7) 

C. Holiness adorns Your house forever: Holiness makes His house —including His people—a source of joy and blessing forever. By the power of God, His house or people will enjoy holiness forever.

>5you…are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood…through Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. 2:5) 

>18…we have access by one Spirit to the Father… 19you are…members of the household of God… 21a holy temple in the Lord…22for a dwelling place of God in the Spirit. (Eph. 2:18-22) 

## V. INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 94

A. The message of Psalm 94 gives confidence to God’s people, while it rebukes and warns the wicked. 

B. It is generally accepted that this psalm was written in context to Israel being in the Babylonian captivity after the destruction of Jerusalem in 586 BC. It has important applications throughout history, while its ultimate fulfillment is in context to the worldwide, evil government of the Antichrist (94:20) that will cause great suffering to God’s people in the Tribulation. 

>7It was granted to him [the Antichrist] to make war with the saints and to overcome them. And authority was given him over every tribe, tongue, and nation. (Rev. 13:7) 

>5They break in pieces Your people…6They slay the widow…and murder the fatherless… 20The throne of iniquity, which devises evil by law…21They gather together against the life of the righteous and condemn innocent blood…23Our God shall cut them off. (Ps. 94:5-6, 20-23) 

C. Psalm 94 is meant to be read together with Psalm 93, for it elaborates on the floods in 93:3-4 as they come specifically against God’s people (94:5). The reigning King in 93:1 is called on to arise to action specifically in releasing His vengeance against those who kill God’s people (94:1-2, 5-6). 

D. Psalm 94 is a prayer based on the conviction that vengeance belongs to the Lord and He will repay. The imprecatory psalms contain prayers for God to judge the wicked (Ps. 5; 11; 17; 35; 55; 59; 69; 109; 137, 140, etc.). These prayers are not in response to the psalmist’s individual offense or injury, but because they warred against God’s cause and His people. These prayers are for the vindication of God’s glory and purpose. Jesus spoke such judgment related to those who killed Him (Mt. 23). 

E. Outline of Psalm 94  
94:1-3	A prayer for God’s vengeance and judgments  
94:4-7	A lament over those who persecuted God’s people  
94:8-11	Warnings to those who persecute God’s people  
94:12-15	Reassurance for God’s people  
94:16-19	A testimony of God’s mercy and deliverance  
94:20-23	God’s judgment of the Antichrist’s throne of iniquity

## VI. A PRAYER FOR GOD’S VENGEANCE AND JUDGMENTS (PS. 94:1-3)

A. The psalmist prayed that God would arise to action as the Judge of the earth by shining forth in terms of punishing the wicked who oppress God’s people (Ps. 94:1-3).

>1O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs…shine forth! 2Rise up, O Judge of the earth; render punishment to the proud. 3Lord, how long will the wicked…triumph? (Ps. 94:1-3) 

B. Rise up, O Judge of the earth: Abraham called God, “the Judge of all the earth” (Gen. 18:25). This is a prayer that the Lord would “rise up” as a man who is about to take bold action. The implication is that God’s judgments were being restrained in the time before this prayer was offered. In the Tribulation the Lord will openly display His power in judging the wicked across the earth.

>25“…Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?” (Gen. 18:25) 

C. O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs: The Lord takes vengeance in His time and way. 

>35Vengeance is Mine, and recompense; their foot shall slip in due time…’ (Deut. 32:35) 

>19Beloved, do not avenge yourselves…“‘Vengeance is Mine, I will repay,’ says the Lord.” (Rom. 12:19) 

D. Shine forth: The shining forth of the Lord in this context speaks of Him manifesting His judgments. 

1. Asaph prophesied that would God come (Ps. 50:2-3)—Jesus—out of heavenly Zion to enter earthly Zion or millennial Jerusalem which is the “city of the great King” (Ps. 48:2). 

>2Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God will shine forth. 3Our God [Jesus] shall come… a fire shall devour before Him, and it shall be very tempestuous [due to His judgments] … (Ps. 50:2-3)

2. The Lord as the Shepherd of Israel shines forth in manifesting His strength (Ps. 80:2). 

>1Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel…You who dwell between the cherubim, shine forth! 2Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up Your strength, and come and save us! (Ps. 80:1-2) 

3. Moses spoke of the Lord who shone forth in the pillar of cloud from Mt. Paran (Deut. 33:2). 

>2“The Lord came from Sinai, and…He shone forth from Mount Paran, and He came with ten thousands of saints; from His right hand came a fiery law for them. (Deut. 33:2) 

E. Render punishment to the proud: The ultimate fulfillment of this will be against the armies of the Antichrist who will be laying siege around Jerusalem (Zech. 12:2-3; 14:2; Joel 3:2, 12; Zeph. 3:8). 

1. The Antichrist’s armies will be the greatest oppressors that the world has ever seen. 

2. God so loved the world that Jesus will kill the oppressors who murder His people (94:5-6; Rev. 19:19-21). 

>19I saw the beast [the Antichrist], the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against Him [Jesus]…and against His army…21And the rest [the kings’ armies] were killed with the sword which proceeded from the mouth of Him [Jesus]… (Rev. 19:19-21) 

3. The multitudes in heaven will rejoice because of God’s vengeance on the harlot Babylon.

>2For true and righteous are His judgments, because He has judged the great harlot… and He has avenged on her the blood of His servants shed by her. (Rev. 19:2) 

F. How long will the wicked? (94:3): Seemingly the wicked triumph, but they will be stopped. The end-time martyrs will pray for vengeance (Rev. 6:10) in unity with believers on earth (Lk. 18:7). 

>9… the souls of those who had been slain for the word of God…10They cried with a loud voice, saying, “How long, O Lord…until You judge and avenge our blood on those…?” (Rev. 6:9-10) 

>7Shall God not avenge [bring justice for] His own elect who cry out day and night…8However, when the Son of Man comes, will He really find faith [agreement] on the earth? (Lk. 18:7-8) 

## VII. A LAMENT OVER THOSE WHO PERSECUTED GOD’S PEOPLE (PS. 94:4-7)

A. The wicked boast as they break into pieces and murder God’s people (94:4-7). 

>4They…speak insolent [boastful] things; all the workers of iniquity boast in themselves. 5They break in pieces Your people…6They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. 7Yet they say, “The Lord does not see, nor does the God of Jacob understand.” (Ps. 94:4-7) 

B. They break in pieces Your people: The Antichrist’s kingdom will break many into pieces.

>7“…a fourth beast [Antichrist’s empire]…was devouring, breaking in pieces…23The fourth beast shall be a fourth kingdom…[it] shall devour the whole earth…break it in pieces. (Dan. 7:7, 23) 

C. They say, “The Lord does not see”: In their blind arrogance, they boldly say that God does not see. When people conclude that God does not see, it emboldens them to act with even greater brutality. 

## VIII. WARNINGS TO THOSE WHO PERSECUTE GOD’S PEOPLE (PS. 94:8-11)

A. The psalmist rebuked these wicked people lacking basic common sense (94:8-11). The Lord who created eyes and ears surely can Himself see and hear. He is listening and knows human thoughts.

>8Understand, you senseless…when will you be wise?…9He who formed the eye, shall He not see? 10He who instructs [chastens] the nations, shall He not correct [rebuke you]… (Ps. 94:8-10) 

B. He who instructs the nations: The word, instructs, is often translated chastens (NAS) or disciplines (ESV).  God disciplines and educates the nations because He loves the nations. He who chastises whole nations will surely correct or rebuke senseless individuals (94:8).

## IX. REASSURANCE FOR GOD’S PEOPLE (PS. 94:12-15)

A. The psalmist talks about how God leads His people into blessing while being chastised (94:12-15). 

>12Blessed is the man whom You instruct [chasten]…and teach out of Your law [Word], 13that You may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit is dug for the wicked. 14For the Lord will not…forsake His inheritance. 15But judgment will return to righteousness… (Ps. 94:12-15) 

B. Blessed is the man whom You instruct: The psalmist calls the chastened one blessed and strengthened under the teaching of the Lord. The law and the rod of chastening go together. 

C. Teach out of Your law: The Lord will teach the believer who is being disciplined in a special way if they spend extended time in the Word during that season. This will lead to greater rest in their heart.  

D. Until the pit is dug for the wicked: The actions of the wicked lead to the digging of their own pit. 

E. Judgment will return to righteousness: Ultimately Jesus will replace wicked rulers with righteous ones who will establish righteous judgments or laws throughout a nation’s legal and court systems. 

>9When Your judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants…will learn righteousness. (Isa. 26:9) 

## X. A TESTIMONY OF GOD’S MERCY AND DELIVERANCE (PS. 94:16-19)

A. After looking for support even in the legal system during the temporary time of political power of the wicked, the psalmist found it only in God. If God had not helped him, then he would have died.

>16Who will rise up for me against the evildoers? Who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? 17Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul would soon have settled in silence [death]. 18If I say, “My foot slips,” Your mercy, O Lord, will hold me up. 19In the multitude of my anxieties within me, Your comforts delight my soul. (Ps. 94:16-19)

B. Unless the Lord had been my help: His soul would have settled the “silence of death” (NIV). Psalm 115:17 makes clear that “silence” here is refers to the realm of the dead—“Sheol.” 

>17The dead do not praise the Lord, nor any who go down into silence. (Ps 115:17) 

C. In the multitude of my anxieties: Your comforts delight my soul. (94:19).  The psalmist was troubled by many thoughts that caused him much turmoil. God’s comfort delighted him.  

## XI. GOD’S JUDGMENT OF THE ANTICHRIST’S THRONE OF INIQUITY (PS. 94:20-23)	

A. The Antichrist will establish legal systems that condemn the innocent in their courts. This describes the intensity of the coming danger that David prophesied in Psalm 2:1-3. 

>20Shall the throne of iniquity, which devises evil by law, have fellowship with You? 21They gather together against the life of the righteous and condemn innocent blood. 22But the Lord has been my defense, and my God the rock of my refuge. 23He has brought on them their own iniquity and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; the Lord our God shall cut them off. (Ps. 94:20-23) 

B. The throne of iniquity: This speaks of national legal systems that will free the wicked to do evil against the righteous because the laws make it easy to condemn the innocent. They will use things like hate laws and social credit scores (in a surveillance state) to legalize taking the life, money, property, freedoms, or rights of an innocent person and appealing to it as the law of the land that even God “supports” since it is for “the good of society.” A surveillance state is a country where the government engages in pervasive surveillance of large numbers of its citizens and visitors.

C. They gather together against the life of the righteous: The antecedent of the “they” is the evildoers in 94:4, 7, 16 who will “band together” to condemn innocent people in their court systems.

D. But the Lord has been my defense: Ultimately the Lord will intervene to vindicate His people.  

E. He shall cut them off: The Father promises to distress or judge these wicked leaders in His wrath (Ps. 2:5) and to magnify Jesus’ leadership as His King (Ps. 2:6, 8). 

>2The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord… 4He who sits in the heavens [the Father] shall laugh; the Lord shall hold them in derision. 5Then He shall…distress them in His deep displeasure: 6“Yet I have set My King on My holy hill of Zion.”…8“I [the Father] will give You [Jesus] the nations for Your inheritance…” (Ps. 2:2-8) 