
# Session 4 The Forerunner Message in Psalm 2

## I. THE END-TIME CONFLICT AGAINST JESUS’ LEADERSHIP (PS. 2)

A. About 3,000 years ago, in Psalm 2, David prophesied that world leaders would work together to fiercely oppose God’s leadership, even seeking to remove the influence of His Word from society and to oppose His purposes for Jerusalem. This opposition will reach its pinnacle in the end times.

B. Outline of Psalm 2— Spurgeon compared this psalm to a 4-part drama.  
2:1-3 The kings’ fierce opposition to Jesus’ leadership  
2:4-6 The Father’s response—to exalt Jesus and judge His enemies  
2:7-9 Jesus’ response—to pray to release God’s promises  
2:10-12 David’s exhortation—to serve God with all of our heart

## II. THE KINGS’ FIERCE OPPOSITION TO JESUS’ LEADERSHIP (PS. 2:1-3)

A. David prophesied that the leaders of the nations would work together in fiercely resisting the Lord’s leadership (2:1-2), seeking to remove the influence of His Word from society (2:3).

>1Why do the nations rage [in anger], and the people plot a vain thing? 2The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the LORD and against His Anointed, saying, 3“Let us break Their bonds in pieces and cast away Their cords from us.” (Ps. 2:1-3)

B. Rage: The leaders and people in the nations will rage in anger against the Lord and His ways (2:1). This rage in society against Jesus will escalate far beyond merely voicing negative opinions against God’s people and truth to warring against God and His people via hate crimes, prison, and death. The conflict will escalate to making “war” against the Lord (Rev. 11:7; 12:17; 13:7; 17:14; 19:19)

>19And I saw the beast, the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against Him [Jesus]…and against His army. (Rev. 19:19)

C. A vain thing: The opposition of world leaders to Jesus will prove to be vain when it utterly fails. Their confidence to succeed is based on having unprecedented resources (economic, military, etc.).

D. To plot and take counsel together: Leaders from every level of society will plot and take counsel together to devise deceptive strategies to mobilize the masses to resist God’s leadership (2:2).

E. Kings set themselves together: The heads of state will set their hearts to stand against the Lord.

F. Rulers take counsel together: The rulers speak of the leaders of society—political, economic, educational, military, entertainment, media, arts, etc. These rulers will take counsel together to devise “clever strategies” to distort the truth about social issues in order to manipulate the masses.

G. Against the LORD and His Christ: These leaders will rage against the Lord (God of Israel) and against His Christ or Anointed One (Jesus) whom God choose to rule all nations from Jerusalem.

H. Break Their bonds and cast away Their cords: The kings and rulers (2:3) will see God’s Word in a negative light, as though it were “bonds” that enslave and “cords” that legalistically bind them to what they perceive as God’s old-fashioned, archaic ways that insist on His morality and truths. They see God’s ways as hindering “human potential” to explore sexuality, love, liberty, and truth.

1. They oppose the truth about Jesus and His definitions of salvation, love, purity, justice, etc.

2. Their rage and agenda will accelerate in attacking God’s commands, seeking to remove His moral boundaries from society, including the sanctity of life, marriage, and sexuality.

I. Before Jesus returns, sin and deception will reach their greatest heights in history, resulting in a falling away from the faith (Dan. 8:23; Mt. 24:9-13; 2 Thes. 2:3; 1 Tim. 4:1-2; 2 Tim. 3:1-7; 4:3-5).

>1Now the Spirit expressly says that in latter times some will depart from the faith, giving heed to deceiving spirits and doctrines of demons… 2having their own conscience seared with a hot iron, 3forbidding to marry… (1 Tim. 4:1-3)

J. “You will watch a generation of Christians…set the Bible aside in an attempt to become more like Jesus and stunningly it will sound completely plausible. This will be perhaps the cleverest of all the devil’s schemes…to sacrifice truth for love’s sake. You will rise or fall based upon whether you will sacrifice one for the other. Will you have the courage to live in the tension of both truth and love?”-Beth Moore

## III. THE FATHER’S RESPONSE—TO EXALT JESUS AND JUDGE HIS ENEMIES (PS. 2:4-6)

A. King David described the Father’s response to the leaders of society who oppose His Word (2:4-6). The Father promises to distress or judge these rebellious leaders with His wrath (2:5) and to magnify Jesus’ leadership as His King who will rule all the nations from Jerusalem (2:6, 8).

>4He who sits in the heavens [the Father] shall laugh; the LORD shall hold them in derision. 5Then He shall speak to them in His wrath and distress them in His deep displeasure [anger]: 6“Yet I have set My King on My holy hill of Zion [Jerusalem].” (Ps. 2:4-6)

B. He who sits in the heavens shall laugh: The Lord sits on His sovereign throne and laughs at their arrogance for thinking that they will prevail due to their great resources (economic, military, etc.). The Father’s actions are made known to give boldness to His people and to encourage their faith. God’s people are not to draw back in intimidation before the rage of these world leaders.

C. Hold in derision: God will hold these leaders in derision or view them with scorn and contempt. He will not tolerate their deeds, and He wants them to know that He is angry with them.

D. He shall distress them in His deep displeasure: He will express His anger or deep displeasure against all that hinders love. This is not a contradiction to God’s love but an expression of it. God will distress or shake all nations through the seal, trumpet, and bowl judgments (Rev. 6-19).

>6Thus says the LORD: “…I will shake heaven and earth, the sea and dry land; 7and I will shake all nations, and they shall come to the Desire of All Nations [Jesus]…” (Hag. 2:6-7)

E. I have set My King: The Father’s message is clear. He declares, “I have set My King on My hill” in Jerusalem (2:6). Jesus is “set” on His throne by the Father in two installments—first, in heaven after His resurrection (Eph. 1:20) and later on earth when He returns to Jerusalem. At present, the Father is committed to magnifying Jesus’ kingship in the greatest revival in history leading up to His return (Joel 2:28-32).

F. The holy hill of Zion: The holy hill of Zion speaks of earthly Jerusalem. With fierce anti-Semitism, the nations will attack God’s purpose for Jesus to rule all the nations from Jerusalem (Jer. 3:17).

G. He shall speak to them in His wrath: When God “speaks in wrath,” He usually speaks through His people—His messengers—everyday believers like us. He will speak of His wrath to the rebellious leaders of society through His people. God’s judgments come to remove what hinders love. The message of God’s judgment is the one truth that is opposed most in the Church and by the nations.

H. One characteristic of a false prophet is that they prophesy only blessing to people—even to those who refuse God’s leadership (Jer. 6:14; 8:11; 14:13-14; 23:16-22; Ezek. 13:9-10, 16; Mic. 3:5-6).

>16Do not listen to the words of the prophets who…17continually say to those who despise Me, “The LORD has said, ‘You shall have peace…no evil shall come upon you.’” (Jer. 23:16-17)

## IV. JESUS’ RESPONSE—TO PRAY TO RELEASE GOD’S PROMISES (PS. 2:7-9)

A. Jesus responds to the Father’s message in 2:5-6 with prayer that agrees with God’s decrees to Him (2:7-9). David heard a Trinitarian conversation in which the Father told Jesus to pray for the nations (2:8). Here, Jesus reveals Himself as the Great Intercessor who prays for His power to be fully released on earth. He will lead the Church in the nations in prayer for the greatest revival in history.

>7“I [Jesus] will declare the [Father’s] decree: The LORD has said to Me, ‘You are My Son, today I have begotten You. 8Ask of Me [the Father], and I will give You [Jesus] the nations for Your inheritance, and the ends of the earth for Your possession. 9You shall break them with a rod of iron; You shall dash them to pieces like a potter’s vessel.’” (Ps. 2:7-9)

B. I will declare the decree: Jesus rules the nations by praying the decrees that the Father gave Him. The essence of intercession is to pray the Father’s decrees over cites and nations.

C. David identified 5 aspects of the decree that Jesus uses in prayer to the Father (2:7-9). They give insight into how Jesus prays into the Father’s commitment to establish Him as King in Jerusalem and how the body of Christ is to participate with Jesus in praying that He be exalted as King.
1. My Son: Jesus’ identity in sonship as one who is fully God and fully Man
2. Begotten: Jesus was publicly vindicated as the Son when the Father raised Him.
3. Ask: Jesus engages in prayer to release power and establish His government.
4. Inheritance: The nations are Jesus’ inheritance to fully possess.
5. Dash: Jesus will demolish the evil infrastructure of cities before He rebuilds them.

D. #1 You are My Son: Jesus declares His identity in sonship before the Father. The Father decreed the truth of Jesus’ sonship at two key moments in Jesus’ ministry—at His baptism just before He entered the wilderness temptation (Mt. 3:17) and at the Mt. of Transfiguration just before going to the cross (Mt. 17:5). The Father declared His “belovedness,” echoing the decree from Psalms 2:7.

>17“This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” (Mt. 3:17)

>5…a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is My beloved Son...” (Mt. 17:5)

1. After Jesus spoke of His sonship before the Sanhedrin, they charged Him with blasphemy that was deserving of death (Mt. 26:63-66). Why? His claim to be the unique Son of God meant that He was claiming to be God (Jn. 5:18). We must declare Jesus’ divinity as the Son of God.

2. People accept Jesus as a good teacher without receiving Him as God with sole authority to define truth, righteousness, and salvation, having the authority to judge the human race.

3. In a secondary way, we may apply this personally by seeing ourselves as the Father’s beloved children. As we are established in our sonship identity, it strengthens us and silences Satan’s accusing voice in our lives.

E. #2 Today I have begotten You: The Father publicly vindicated Jesus as the Son of God by manifesting His supernatural power to raise Jesus from the dead. The day of this “begetting” was the day the Father raised Him from the dead and seated Jesus as His right hand as the Son of God.

1. In Acts 13:33, Paul interpreted Psalm 2:7 as a prophetic promise of Jesus’ resurrection. Thus, Paul interpreted the “begetting” in Psalms 2:7 as occurring at Jesus’ resurrection as a Man.

>33God has fulfilled this [promise] for us…in that He has raised up Jesus. As it is also written in the second Psalm: ‘You are My Son, today I have begotten You.’ (Acts 13:33)

2. Paul did not say Jesus was only then made the Son of God at the resurrection, nor that He became the Son of God at the resurrection, but that He was publicly declared to be the Son of God with power (Rom. 1:4). The resurrection made public what had always been true of Him.

>4…declared to be the Son of God with power…by the resurrection… (Rom. 1:4)

3. The Father “begat “or “brought forth” Jesus in His ascension and enthronement to sit at God’s right hand (Heb. 1:3, 5) and conferred on Him the glory of His priestly office (Heb. 5:5). In the incarnation, the Father “begot” the Son by the Spirit causing Mary to conceive (Jn. 1:14).

>3…[Jesus] sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high… 5For to which of the angels did He ever say: “You are My Son, today I have begotten You”? (Heb. 1:3-5)

>5So also Christ did not glorify Himself to become High Priest, but it was He who said to Him: “You are My Son, today I have begotten You.” (Heb 5:5)

4. Believers participate in His resurrection by walking in the power of the Spirit (Rom. 6:5).

F. #3 Ask of Me: The Father decreed that Jesus “ask Him” for the nations as His inheritance. Jesus declared that He will use prayer to take possession of all of the governments of the nations on earth. Believers participate in this by partnering with Jesus in prayer that the nations submit to Him.

G. #4 Jesus’ inheritance is to possess the nations: Jesus’ inheritance is to be King over all the nations. All will openly acknowledge His leadership. The Father gives Jesus leadership over the nations—that is the people, the governments, and all realms of society in all the nations on earth (Rev. 5:12).

>8“I will give You the nations for Your inheritance and the ends of the earth for Your possession.” (Ps. 2:8)

1. This happens in part in this age and in fullness in the Millennium.

2. Under Jesus’ leadership all nations will obey the Father (1 Cor. 15:24-28; Eph. 1:4-6, 9-10).

H. #5 Jesus will dash and break the nations: Jesus will break and dash every city and social institution on the planet that persists in warring against His Father’s agenda.

>9You shall break them with a rod of iron; You shall dash them to pieces like a potter’s vessel. (Ps. 2:9)

1. The 7th bowl judgment will involve releasing the most severe earthquake in history, followed by 100-pound hailstones (Rev. 16:17-21).

>17Then the seventh angel poured out his bowl… 18there was a great earthquake…as had not occurred since men were on the earth… 19and the cities of the nations fell… 20Then every island fled away, and the mountains were not found. 21And great hail from heaven fell upon men, each hailstone about the weight of a talent [100 pounds]… (Rev. 16:17-21)

2. The severity of the 7 bowls of wrath is necessary—because the occultic darkness, perversion, and oppression of Harlot Babylon and Antichrist systems will infiltrate all levels of society. Thus, the Lord will destroy many cities and dash to pieces their societal infrastructures—including their financial, legal, educational, institutions that empowered evil activities, etc.

3. The demolition seen in Psalm 2:9 will be expressed during Great Tribulation in context to Antichrist’s reign of terror and the release of the seals, trumpets, and bowls judgments.

4. One result of this global demolition is that, in various geographic areas, space will be cleared to make room to rebuild new buildings with new materials, designs, and technologies.

5. Overcomers will participate in this with Jesus during the millennial kingdom.

>26“And he who overcomes…until the end, to him I will give power over the nations— 27‘He shall rule them with a rod of iron; they shall be dashed to pieces like the potter’s vessels’ — as I also have received from My Father” [in Psalm 2:9]… (Rev. 2:26-27)

6. Believers participate in this now by asking the Lord to release justice and remove injustice. Today, we do not pray for the Lord to dash the nations but to remove injustice in the nations as we ask for mercy on the nations.

## V. DAVID’S EXHORTATION—TO SERVE GOD WITH ALL OF OUR HEART (PS. 2:10-12)

A. David exhorted the leaders of society to receive what the Lord said through him and to serve the Lord in the fear of God, with joy overflowing from love and affection for Jesus (2:10-12). David specifically called the heads of state and the judges in the legal and court systems to listen carefully.

>10Now therefore, be wise, O kings; be instructed, you judges of the earth. 11Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling. 12Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and you perish in the way, when His wrath is kindled but a little. (Ps. 2:10-12)

B. Rejoice with trembling: To rejoice includes being grateful for the privilege of being allowed to participate with the Lord by serving with Him, even in small and challenging ministry assignments.

C. Kiss the Son: To pay homage to King Jesus with obedient love flowing from a spirit of affection

D. Serve the Lord: David exhorted people to serve zealously with love, joy, and in the fear of God. Thus, to serve Jesus without drawing back in bitterness, complaint, or lazy passivity.

1. In this context, serving God includes proclaiming the Father’s message in 2:5-6 and praying in unity with Jesus according to 2:7-9. Proclamation of this message and prayer are essential aspects of serving God and ministering to people in a forerunner spirit.

2. Before Jesus returns, the Church will see the greatest prayer movement and harvest in history.

3. Jesus linked night-and-day prayer with establishing justice in the end times “when He comes” back to earth (Lk. 18:7-8). The context of Jesus’ teaching in Luke 18:1-8 is His teaching on the end times in the verses immediately prior, in Luke 17:22-37.

>7Shall not God bring about justice for His elect, who cry to Him day and night…? 8He will bring about justice for them…when the Son of Man comes, will He find faith the earth? (Lk. 18:7-8 NAS)

E. The apostles followed the model of Psalm 2:7-8 by joining Christ in His ministry of intercession in asking God to manifest His power before the hostile leaders in Jerusalem (Acts 4:27-29).

>24…they raised their voice to God with one accord and said: “Lord, You are God…25who by the mouth of Your servant David have said: ‘Why did the nations rage…? 26The kings of the earth took their stand, and the rulers were gathered together against the LORD and against His Christ.’ 27For truly against…Jesus…Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together… 29Now, Lord, look on their threats, and grant to Your servants that with all boldness they may speak Your word, 30by stretching out Your hand to heal, and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of Your holy Servant Jesus.” (Acts 4:24-30)

F. The Psalm 2 crisis requires a Joel 2 response, resulting in an Acts 2 outpouring of the Spirit.

G. The Spirit is calling the Church to understand the coming revival and crisis and to respond in the way that Scripture teaches. God requires the response set forth in the book of Joel (2:12-17) which includes turning to God with all of our heart and praying for an outpouring of the Spirit (2:28-31).
