
# Session 6 The Forerunner Message in Psalm 45

## I. THE BEAUTIFUL KING: THE WAR AND THE WEDDING IN JERUSALEM

A. The theme of Psalm 45 is the beauty of King Jesus, including how He loves and honors His Bride. Some see this as celebrating “the ideal” wedding of a king in ancient Israel with its primary application to the coming Messiah and His one Bride—that has an expression in Jewish believers with natural bodies living in millennial Jerusalem and in all the redeemed from this age living with resurrected bodies in the New Jerusalem. Psalm 45 gives an earthly millennial view of the wedding procession. Most ancient Jewish commentators interpret Psalm 45 as being about their Messiah.

B. Psalm 45 provides “prophetic hints” into the marriage supper of the Lamb (Rev. 19:6-8).

>6I heard…the voice of a great multitude…saying, 7“Let us be glad and rejoice…for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His wife has made herself ready.” 8To her it was granted to be arrayed in fine linen… 9Blessed are those who are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb! (Rev. 19:6-9)

C. Jesus’ second coming will include His royal procession into Jerusalem to be received as King. This procession will begin by Jesus traveling across the sky so that every eye will see Him (Rev. 1:7), then He will march through the land as He defeats the Antichrist’s armies that surround Jerusalem.

>7Behold, He is coming with clouds, and every eye will see Him… (Rev. 1:7)

1. When Jesus returns, Jerusalem will be surrounded by hostile nations (Zech. 12:2; 14:1-2).

>3…all nations of the earth are gathered against [Jerusalem]… 9I will…destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem… (Zech. 12:3, 9)

2. Isaiah saw Messiah traveling or marching north in power to Jerusalem from Bozrah, a city in the ancient territory of Edom which is modern-day Jordan (Isa. 63:1). Jesus, as the divine Warrior King, will come to destroy the Antichrist’s armies that will surround Jerusalem.

>1Who is this who comes from Edom…from Bozrah…traveling in the greatness of His strength?—“I [Jesus] who speak…mighty to save…3I have trodden them [the nations] in My anger…their blood is sprinkled upon My garments…” (Isa. 63:1-3)

>12You marched through the land in indignation; You trampled the nations in anger… (Hab. 3:12)

D. Jesus’ procession into Jerusalem (Ps. 68:24) includes traveling on clouds of glory across the whole earth so that every eye will see Him (Rev. 1:7) as He comes with all His raptured and resurrected saints (Mt. 24:30-31; 1 Thes. 3:13; 4:14, 17) and all the angels (Mt. 25:31). He will come in the glory of the Father (Mt. 16:27). Sometime after this, He hosts His wedding celebration in Jerusalem.

>24They have seen Your procession, O God, the procession of my God, my King, into the sanctuary [in Jerusalem]... 25The singers went before…among them were the maidens… 29Because of Your temple at Jerusalem, kings will bring presents to You… 31Envoys will come out of Egypt… 32Sing to God, you kingdoms of the earth… 33to Him who rides on the heavens… (Ps. 68:24-33)

## II. IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT PSALM 45 ˙

A. The heading of Psalm 45 informs us that it is a song of love that was given to the chief musician “set to the lilies” (Heb. shoshannim), a “contemplation” (Heb. maschil) of the sons of Korah.

1. A love song: The Father’s song of love magnifying the story of Jesus and His Bride.

2. To the chief musician: To the director of the temple music and choirs.

3. Set to the lilies: This song was set to shoshannim which translate as signifying lilies (at a wedding ceremony), and some see it as referring to an instrument of six strings.

4. A contemplation: The Hebrew maschil is translated as “a contemplation,” implying that this is a teaching psalm. Maschil means to give instruction.

5. Sons of Korah: They served in the sanctuary and were known for their devotion to God.

B. The first half concerns the King (45:1-9), and the second half concerns the queen (45:10-17). There are two different yet equally important locations—battlefield (45:3-5) and palace (45:6-16).

C. Outline of Psalm 45  
45:1-2 The beauty of Jesus causes hearts to overflow  
45:3-5 Jesus uses His power to establish humility and righteousness  
45:6-7 Jesus’ throne and love for righteousness  
45:8-9 Jesus’ royal court on the day of His wedding  
45:10-12 The Bride’s call to sustain her loyal love  
45:13-15 The Bride’s procession to the great wedding  
45:16-17 The Father’s marriage blessing

## III. THE BEAUTY OF JESUS CAUSES HEARTS TO OVERFLOW (PS. 45:1-2)

A. The Father’s heart overflows with a good theme about the beauty of Jesus (Ps. 45:1-2).

>1My heart is overflowing with a good theme; I recite my composition concerning the King; My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. 2You are fairer [more beautiful] than the sons of men; grace is poured upon Your lips; therefore God has blessed You forever. (Ps. 45:1-2)

1. The writer of Hebrews clarified that Psalm 45 is the Father’s song to Jesus (45:6; Heb. 1:8).

>8But to the Son He [the Father] says: “Your throne, O God, is forever…” (Heb. 1:8)

2. Our emotions are most exhilarated and best liberated in encountering the man Christ Jesus. Christian morality without spiritual passion for Jesus can be boring and ineffective.

B. My heart is overflowing with a good theme: Jesus and His Bride is the good theme of the kingdom. The psalmist’s heart overflowed like a fountain with affection in seeing the beauty of Jesus.

C. I recite my composition concerning the King: His composition or good theme is about the beauty of the King—Jesus’ victory over the nations (45:3-5), His throne (45:6-7), His court (45:8-9), His Bride (45:10-16), and His fame (45:17) when He returns to establish His reign on the earth.

D. My tongue is like a ready writer: The pen of a ready writer speaks of one that is full, fluent, and skillful. His tongue was in such readiness to set forth the beauty of Jesus and His exploits of love.

E. You are fairer than the sons of men: Jesus is infinitely more beautiful than all other human beings. His plans and thoughts are beautiful—about His people, His Father, His leadership over earth. Jesus showed the apostle John a glimpse of His unveiled glory on Patmos (Rev. 1:12-18).

F. Isaiah prophesied that the Spirit would emphasize Jesus’ beauty in the generation of His return (Isa. 33:17; cf. 4:2; 28:5; 61:3) and that God’s people will find strength by delighting in it (33:6).

>6“…knowledge [of God’s beauty] will be the stability of your times and the strength of salvation… 17Your eyes will see the King in His beauty…” (Isa. 33:6, 17)

>2In that day the Branch of the LORD [Messiah] shall be beautiful and glorious… (Isa. 4:2)

G. The book of Revelation is about the glory of Jesus (Rev. 1:1) and His plan to transition the earth to the age to come. It is not a doomsday prophecy about the end of the world, but a glorious love story of Jesus ushering in a new world order. It describes the end of the dark night of Satan’s oppression of the human race and the dawning of Jesus’ new day as He returns to rule all nations with His people, destroy the Antichrist’s empire, remove sin from the planet, and fill it with God’s glory.

H. Grace is poured upon Your lips: The grace on Jesus’ speech includes His tender words of love and comfort, His prophetic words that give His people direction, His intercession for His people and kingdom, and His powerful words releasing His miracles and judgment (Rev. 19:15; cf. Ps. 2:8; 33:6; Isa. 11:4; 30:27-33; Isa. 42:13; Jn. 6:63 Eph. 6:17; 1 Thes. 4:16; 2 Thes. 2:8; Heb. 1:3; 7:25).

1. Grace on His speech reveals some of the greatest aspects of His beauty. Each phrase from His lips in the past, present, and future is filled with love and truth, and they release His power.

2. “No man has ever spoken like this Man,” many marveled at His words (Mt. 7:29; 13:54; Lk 2:47; 4:22; Jn. 7:46). One sentence from His lips can turn anguish and oppression into joy.

## IV. JESUS USES HIS POWER TO ESTABLISH HUMILITY AND RIGHTEOUSNESS (PS. 45:3-5)

A. Jesus will be openly seen as the One more beautiful than all others in context to His activity when He destroys the Antichrist’s armies in the Armageddon campaign (45:3-5; Rev. 19:11-21). John also prophesies of Jesus as the Bridegroom King going to battle for His Bride (Rev. 19:7-21).

>2You are fairer [more beautiful]… 3Gird Your sword upon Your thigh [at Armageddon], O Mighty One, with Your glory and Your majesty. 4In Your majesty ride prosperously [victoriously] because of truth, humility, and righteousness; and Your right hand shall teach You awesome things. 5Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the King’s enemies; the peoples [nations] fall under You. (Ps. 45:2-5)

B. Gird Your sword: The Father commissions Jesus to gird His sword to destroy the Antichrist’s armies in the Armageddon campaign (45:3). To gird one’s sword meant to prepare to use it.

>19The kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered to make war against Him [Jesus]… 20The Beast [Antichrist] was captured…21The rest were killed with the sword… (Rev. 19:19-21)

C. O Mighty One, with Your glory and majesty: Psalm 45 magnifies Jesus’ humanity and divinity. He is addressed as O Mighty One (El-Gibbor) which is a title highlighting His deity.

D. In Your majesty ride prosperously: Jesus’ second-coming royal procession on a white horse is described here as “riding prosperously in majesty.” Most Bibles translate to ride “prosperously” as to ride “victoriously” or “triumphantly.” Jesus’ victory will be on grandest scale imaginable. He will display His majesty as He releases His end-time judgments in the Armageddon campaign.

E. Because of truth, humility, and righteousness: Jesus will wage war from and for the cause of truth, humility, and righteousness. He will fill the earth and all society with His glory—His beauty, love, humility, etc. (Num. 14:21; Ps. 37:11; 45:4; Hab. 2:14; Zeph. 3:12; Mt. 5:5; 11:29; 1 Pet. 3:4).

>14For the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the glory [beauty] of the LORD… (Hab. 2:14)

F. Your right hand shall teach You awesome things: Jesus’ right hand will do the teaching for Him by awe-striking deeds that will astonish His people and terrify His enemies. Some translate this as His hand will “show” or “demonstrate” awesome things. Jesus’ hand will reveal God’s power in ways that He had never done before—He will truly do a new thing on the earth (Isa. 43:19).

>19Behold, I will do a new thing, now it shall spring forth…I will even make…rivers in the desert. (Isa 43:19)

G. Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the King’s enemies: Jesus’ sword and arrows will destroy His enemies. Moses prophesied that Messiah would use His sword and arrows against His enemies. His arrows are sharp; He uses no blunted shafts. None will be left standing when He uses His bow.

>41“If I whet My glittering sword, and My hand takes hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to My enemies…42I will make My arrows drunk with blood, and My sword shall devour flesh, with the blood of the slain…from the heads of the leaders of the enemy.” (Deut. 32:41-42)

H. The peoples fall under You (45:5): The peoples or nations will fall or come under Jesus’ leadership when He releases His end-time judgment on wicked governments. Every knee shall bow to Him (Phil. 2:9-11). Evil is defeated. It will not thrive because Jesus will bring it to an end one day.

## V. JESUS’ THRONE AND LOVE FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS (PS. 45:6-7)

A. Jesus’ worldwide government will establish righteousness in every sphere of life (Ps. 45:6-7). Because He loves righteousness, He only rewards that which is done in righteousness.

>6Your throne, O God, is forever…a scepter of righteousness is the scepter of Your kingdom. 7You love righteousness and hate wickedness; therefore God, Your God, has anointed You with the oil of gladness more than Your companions. (Ps. 45:6-7)

B. Jesus’ eternal throne of glory will be on the earth in Jerusalem (Jer. 3:17; Mt. 25:31-32). All the Gentile nations will come to worship Jesus (Isa. 2:2-3; 56:6-8; 60:11-14; Zech. 8:20-23).

>17At that time Jerusalem shall be called The Throne of the LORD… (Jer. 3:17)

>31When the Son of Man comes in His glory…then He will sit on the throne of His glory. 32All the nations will be gathered before Him, and He will separate them… (Mt. 25:31-32)

C. O God: Jesus’ perfect humanity and eternal deity are combined in Him as indicated by His name.

D. The oil of gladness: Hebrews 1:8 teaches that Psalm 45 was spoken over Jesus by the Father.

>8To the Son He [Father] says: “Your throne, O God, is forever…9You have loved righteousness…Your God, has anointed You with the oil of gladness more than Your companions.” (Heb. 1:8-9)

1. Jesus possesses more gladness than any man in history. God’s personality is filled with gladness, joy, and pleasure (Deut. 30:9; 1 Chr. 16:27; Ps. 16:11; 36:8; 60:6; 104:31; Isa. 62:4-5; 65:18-19; Jer. 32:41; Zeph. 3:17; Mt. 18:13; Lk. 10:21; Jn. 15:11; Heb. 1:9; 12:2).

>11In Your presence is fullness of joy; at Your right hand are pleasures forevermore. (Ps. 16:11)

2. His wedding is referred to as “the day of the gladness of His heart” (Song 3:11).

>11On the day of his wedding, the day of the gladness of his heart. (Song. 3:11)

>5…as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you. (Isa. 62:5)

## VI. JESUS’ ROYAL COURT ON THE DAY OF HIS WEDDING (PS. 45:8-9)

A. Jesus is set forth here in perfumed garments as the Bridegroom with attendants of His court. His scented garments also speak of His actions similarly to how the Bride’s garments reflect her actions.

>8All Your garments are scented with myrrh and aloes and cassia, out of the ivory palaces, by which they [musical instruments] have made You glad. 9Kings’ daughters are among Your honorable women; at Your right hand stands the queen in gold from Ophir. (Ps. 45:8-9)

B. Scented with myrrh and aloes and cassia: Myrrh and cassia were used in making the anointing oil (Ex. 30:23-24). Myrrh was an expensive fragrant gum resin used in making perfume. It was also used as a burial spice (Jn. 19:39-40; Mk. 15:23). Aloes came from a scented wood that contained a resin that was used in expensive perfume. Cassia came from the fragrant roots of a plant or tree.

C. Out of the ivory palaces (45:8): The ivory palaces speak of the King’s palace (45:13, 15; 48:3)—His palace complex will include the millennial temple where will be 90 chambers (Ezek. 41:6). Ivory is rare, beautiful, and durable. Some palaces were adorned with ivory inlaid in the paneling in such abundance that it names the whole structure (Amos 3:15; 6:4).

D. By which they have made You glad (45:8): There are two views on what “they” refers to.

1. Some see “they” as referring to the players of the instruments making music in the ivory palace. The Hebrew minim is translated as “they” only in the KJV and NKJV, whereas most translate it as “stringed instruments,” rendering it, “Out of the ivory palaces stringed instruments have made You glad.” Jesus, the Bridegroom King is made glad by the music of stringed instruments playing in His ivory palaces as He engages in His wedding.

2. Some see “they” as referring to Jesus’ garments and deeds that are done from His ivory place. They make Him glad—He will have no regret in them because they are excellent and perfect.

E. Kings’ daughters are among Your honorable women (45:9): In the wedding procession there will be many honorable ones standing as “bridesmaids.” Honorable women from various royal families in millennial nations signify how greatly the wedding ceremony will be esteemed. The kings’ daughters would be Gentiles believers in the Millennium (Ps. 47:9; 72:10-11; Gal. 3:8).

F. At Your right hand stands the queen: The queen stands in a place of great honor at His right hand, arrayed with gold. Psalm 45 gives an earthly millennial view of the wedding procession. The queen here seems to be the redeemed in millennial Jerusalem (or all Israel). She will be established as queen on the millennial earth in the Lord’s palace in Jerusalem.

G. The Old Testament prophets made many allusions to Israel under the figure of the Bride of Yahweh and made reference to Jerusalem as being married to the Lord (Isa. 54:4-12; 62:2-5; Jer. 2:2; 3:14; 31:32; Ezek. 16:13-15, 32; 23:1-45; Hos. 1:2; 2:7, 14-23; 3:1-5).

>5For your Maker is your husband… 6For the LORD has called you [Jerusalem] like a woman forsaken… 7For a mere moment I have forsaken you, but with great mercies I will gather you. (Isa. 54:5-7)

>2The Gentiles shall see your [Jerusalem’s] righteousness, and all kings your glory… 4You [Jerusalem] shall no longer be termed Forsaken…the Lord delights in you [Jerusalem]… 5as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you. (Isa. 62:2-5)

H. He has one Bride that will have an expression in Jewish believers with natural bodies in millennial Jerusalem and in all the redeemed from this age living with resurrected bodies in the New Jerusalem (Mt. 9:15; 22:2; 25:2; Jn. 3:29; 2 Cor. 11:2; Eph. 5:32; Rev. 19:7-9; 22:17). There is no distinction in the resurrected Church between individual Jewish and Gentile believers (Rom. 10:12; Gal. 3:28).

>28There is neither Jew nor Greek…for you are all one in Christ Jesus. (Gal. 3:28)

I. The resurrected Bride of Christ will stand with Jesus with glorious garments. They receive garments related to their obedience in this age—our rewards will be reflected in our garments (Rev. 19:8).

>7…the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His wife has made herself ready.” 8And to her it was granted to be arrayed in fine linen…the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints. (Rev. 19:7-8)

## VII. THE BRIDE’S CALL TO SUSTAIN HER LOYAL LOVE (PS. 45:10-12)

A. The call to “listen” is to alert the queen to the great importance of the message being given to her. She is addressed as “daughter” from the heart of a father speaking to a bride at her wedding. He urges her to think deeply about the implications of entering this new relationship and position as the King’s Bride; it has new responsibilities and favor even from leaders of Gentile nations as Tyre.

>10Listen, O daughter, consider and incline your ear; forget your people, and your father’s house; 11so the King will greatly desire your beauty; because He is your Lord, worship Him. 12And the daughter of Tyre will come with a gift; the rich among the people will seek your favor. (Ps. 45:10-12)

B. The queen who stands at Jesus’ right hand (45:9) is here referred to as the daughter who is to forget her father’s house (45:10) and the royal daughter who is glorious in the King’s palace (45:13).

C. Forget your people: An unidentified fatherly voice exhorts the new Bride-to-be to fully seek the King’s interests. Jesus spoke this very thing to His disciples (Lk. 14:25-26).

>26“If anyone…does not hate his father and mother…he cannot be My disciple.” (Lk. 14:26)

D. The King will greatly desire your beauty (45:11): The many costly decisions involved in fully obeying Jesus are beautiful to Him. He is moved by the extravagant obedience of His people.

E. Because He is your Lord, worship Him (45:11): Christ is worthy to be loved supremely.

F. The daughter of Tyre will come with a gift (45:12): Rich leaders from Gentile nations like Tyre shall bring financial gifts to express honor for Jesus and their desire to gain favor with the queen.

>10The kings of Tarshish and of the isles will bring presents; the kings of Sheba and Seba will offer gifts. 11Yes, all kings shall fall down before Him; all nations shall serve Him. (Ps. 72:10-11)

G. The rich among the people will seek your favor (45:12): The rich will deem it good to bring a gift to Jesus and His Bride/queen to honor her new exalted station and to seek her favor (Isa. 60:5-13). The effect of true conversion makes people willing to lay their money at Jesus’ feet.

>27All the ends of the world shall remember and turn to the LORD, and all the families of the nations shall worship before You… 29All the prosperous of the earth shall eat and worship… (Ps. 22:27-29)

## VIII. THE BRIDE’S PROCESSION TO THE GREAT WEDDING (PS. 45:13-15)

A. The psalmists moved from the beauty of King and His exploits to the glory of His queen (45:13-15). The scene changes from the battlefield (45:2-5) to the King’s court (45:6-9) to the wedding-hall.

>13The royal daughter is all glorious within the palace; her clothing is woven with gold. 14She shall be brought to the King in robes of many colors; the virgins, her companions who follow her, shall be brought to You. 15With gladness and rejoicing they shall be brought; they shall enter the King’s palace. (Ps. 45:13-15)

B. In 45:13-15, the queen leaves her father’s house in great pageantry, being gloriously adorned and followed by her bridal party including her train of “bridesmaids” as she is led to the King’s palace. Some of the ancient wedding customs in Israel are recognized in 45:13-15. For example, a bride proceeded to the house of the groom—where she was formally received with her attendants. This passage gives prophetic insights and hints into the celebration of the marriage supper of the Lamb.

C. The royal daughter: The queen is described as the “daughter of a king” in her family heritage. She is led in a glorious procession to the wedding hall in the King’s palace (45:15).

D. The royal daughter is all glorious within the palace (45:13): The queen is all glorious within the palace. She is in the palace or home of her father or she may already be in a part of King’s vast “palace complex” where multiple “ivory palaces” exist in the one vast complex (45:8; 48:3, 13).

>2…The joy of the whole earth is…the city of the great King. 3God is in her palaces… 4Behold, the kings…passed by together. 5They saw it, and so they marveled… (Ps. 48:2-5)

E. Her clothing is woven with gold (45:13): With fabric of needlework, in garments of many colors. The point here is to show her rank, splendor, and godly character by her clothing.

F. She shall be brought to the King in robes of many colors (45:14): This description of her beauty and attire as she is conducted to the King in a marriage procession shows her rank. A modern analogy to this is the groom waiting in a church, and the bride and bridesmaids coming to him.

G. The virgins, her companions who follow her, shall be brought to You (45:14): It is suggested by some that the virgins that follow her may speak of youth in millennial kingdom devoted to Jesus. These virgins were referred to in 45:9 as “kings’ daughters” and “honorable women” (45:9).

H. With gladness and rejoicing they shall be brought (45:15): There will be gladness at the wedding in millennial Jerusalem together with the attending saints and angels who live in New Jerusalem.

>6I heard…the voice of a great multitude…saying, “Alleluia! For the Lord God Omnipotent reigns! 7Let us be glad and rejoice…for the marriage of the Lamb has come…” (Rev. 19:6-7)

I. They shall enter the King’s palace (45:15): The queen and her bridal party enter the wedding hall in the King’s palace (45:15). There will be a wedding feast in the millennial Jerusalem when the veil of darkness is removed from the millennial earth and every tear is wiped away (Isa. 25:6-8).

>6In this mountain [in Jerusalem] the Lord…will make for all people a feast of choice pieces… 7He will destroy on this mountain…the veil that is spread over all nations. 8He will swallow up death forever, and the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from all faces… (Isa. 25:6-8)

## IX. THE FATHER’S MARRIAGE BLESSING—GREAT HONOR FOREVER (PS. 45:16-17)

A. The Father’s blessing on the marriage includes exalting Jesus with great honor forever (45:16-17). Instead of Jesus’ fame being derived only from the godly leaders who came before Him, it will be also come from those He raises up as “princes” in the millennial earth. The spiritual children who Jesus raises up will have a far greater impact on the earth than the leaders who came before Him.

>16Instead of Your fathers [Moses, David, etc.] shall be Your sons, whom You [Jesus] shall make princes in all the earth. 17I [the Father] will make Your [Jesus’] name to be remembered in all generations; therefore the people shall praise You forever. (Ps. 45:16-17)

B. Princes in the earth: Jesus will give some millennial saints government on the earth (Dan 7:18, 27).

>18But the saints of the Most High shall…possess the kingdom forever… 27And the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven shall be given to…the saints of the Most High. (Dan. 7:18, 27)

C. I will make Your name to be remembered forever (45:17): The Father’s heart overflows again as it did in 45:1— here, He promised that Jesus’ name will be celebrated forever. The fame of Jesus is not entrusted to men, but the Father personally pledged to exalt Jesus’ name (Phil. 2:9-11).

>9Therefore God has highly exalted Him and given Him the name which is above every name, 10that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in heaven, and of those on earth, and of those under the earth, 11and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. (Phil. 2:9-11)
